 
Page 1 of 9  
Clinic al Policy: Fecal Incontinence Treatments  
Reference Number: CP. MP.137                                 Coding Implications  
Last Review Date: 11/1 9 Revision Log  
  
See Important Reminder  at the end of th is policy for  important  regulatory and legal 
information . 
 
Description  
Fecal incontinence defined as the uncontrolled passage of feces or gas over  at least 1 month’s 
duration, in an individual of at least four years of age, who had previously achieved control.  It 
has a negative impact on self -esteem and quality of life.1 The choice of therapy depends upon the 
etiology of incontinence, the anatomy of the sphincters, and also on the effect of incontinence on 
the quality of life .  
 Note:  For biofeedback treatment for fecal incontinence, please refer to CP.MP.168 Biofeedback.  
 
Policy/Criteria  
I. It is the policy of health plans affiliated with Centene Corporation
® that procedures to treat 
fecal incontinence are medically necessary  when meeting the following:  
A. Severe, chronic fecal incontinence (defined as the involuntary loss of solid stool or liquid 
stool on a weekly  or more frequent basis)  has not responded adequately to conservative 
treatments (e.g. pharmacotherapy, dietary management, strengthening exercises) ;  
B. Age ≥ 4 years and the member has previously achieved bowel control;  
C. Requested procedure meets one of the following:  
1. Sacral nerve stimulation for a w eak but structurally intact anal sphincter;  
2. Sphincter repair (sphincteroplasty)  when t here is a defined defect  of the external anal 
sphincter;  
3. Artificial bowel sphincter  (Acticon Neosphincter)  when all of the following criteria is 
met: 
a. Age  ≥ 18 years;  
b. Failure of , or not  a candidate for , medical interventions  or surgical sphincter 
repair ; 
c. Incontinence is not complicated by an irreversibly obstructed proximal segment of  
bowel;  
d. Absence of any physical or mental i llness  that would increase surgical risk ; 
4. Colostomy , as last resort, when all other treatments have failed  or are contraindicated . 
 
II. It is the policy of health plans affiliated w ith Centene Corporation that all  the following 
procedures are considered investigational  for the treatment of fecal incontinence.  Although 
they continue to be evaluated in clinical studies, current medical literature do es not support 
their efficacy : 
A. Transanal radiofrequency therapy (Secca procedure) ;   
B. Injectable bulking agent s [e.g. , dextranomer/hyaluronic acid (Solesta)] ; 
C. Anal electrical stimulation ; 
D. Posterior tibial nerve stimulation ; 
E. Vaginal bowel control (e .g, Eclipse system ). 
 CLINICAL POLICY          
Fecal Incontinence Treatments  
 
Page 2 of 9  
Background  
Treatment of fecal incontinence is challenging. The goal of treatment is to restore continence and 
to improve the quality of life.  Dietary and medical management are recommended as first -line 
therapy for patients with fecal incontinence. If fecal incontinence is a result of or in conjunction 
with anato mic defects (e. g., rectovaginal fistula, rectal or hemorrhoidal prolapse etc.) , the defects 
should be corrected first as this often improves or eliminates the incontinence.    
 Sacral neuromodulation is thought to modulate rectal sensation by activating or  deactivating 
chemical mediating receptors, stimulating the afferent pathway, and  changing brain acti vity 
relevant to the continence. Sacral neuromodulation  has consistently shown to result in a 
reduction in frequency of fecal incontinence episodes  and may  be considered for incontinent 
patients with and without sphincter defects.  Sphincter repair (sphincteroplasty) may be offered to symptomatic patients with a  defined defect of the external anal sphincter.  Implantation of an 
artificial bowel sphincter remains an effective tool for select patients with severe fecal incontinence ; however,  its use is limited by complications including explanation  in up to one -
third of patients.
2  
 Injectable bulking agents [e.g., dextranomer/hyaluronic acid (Solesta)] have be en investigated 
for the treatment of fecal incontinence .  However, evidence in the peer review literature 
evaluating this treatment is limited.  There is a paucity of randomized , controlled trials and 
studies are limited by their small study sizes. A  prospective multicenter trial of 136 patients with 
fecal incontinence who received non -animal stabilized hyaluronic acid/dextranomer ( NASHA 
Dx) bulking agent reported it provided a significant improvement of fecal incontinence 
symptoms in a majority of patients  and this effect was stable during the course of the follow -up 
and maintained for 3 years .
3 Long-term data  is lacking , however, regarding the durability of this 
treatment.  
 Transanal radiofrequency therapy (e.g., Secca procedure)  is another procedure proposed for the 
treatment of fecal incontinence).   This procedure uses thermo -controlled delivery of 
radiofrequency energy to the anal canal.  The reported evidence is relatively sparse and has relevant limitations.  Most studies have been small single -center series  with short  to mid -term 
follow -up. 
 The Eclipse System (Pelvalon Inc) is a nonsurgical vaginal bowel -control system for the 
treatment of fecal incontinence in women  18 to 75 years old who have had four or more FI 
episodes in a two- week period. T he device includes an inflatable balloon, which is placed in the 
vagina. Upon inflation, the balloon exerts pressure through the vaginal wall onto the rectal area, thereby reducing the number of FI episodes. The device is initially fitted and inflated by a  
clinician (with the use of a pump) and after proper fitting, the patient can inflate and deflate the device at home as needed.   The device was granted FDA approval through the de novo classification process  based on non- clinical testing as well as a clin ical trial of 61 women with FI 
treated with the device. The trial showed that after one month almost 80 percent of women in the study experienced a 50 percent decrease in the number of FI episodes while using the device, as compared to baseline.   Studies t o date are limited by size and lack of long term evidence.  
 American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons  (ASCRS)  CLINICAL POLICY          
Fecal Incontinence Treatments  
 
Page 3 of 9  
In their most recent guidelines on the treatment of fecal incontinence, the ASCRS assigns strong 
recommendations  in favor of sacral neuromodulation , and sphincteroplasty based upon moderate 
quality of evidence.   The ASCRS reports that i njection of biocompatible bulking agents into the 
anal canal may help to decrease episodes of passive fecal incontinence.  H owever, based upon 
moderate- quality evidence , this is a weak recommendation .  The  ASCRS notes that although 
modest improvements have been reported in short -term outcomes, long -term follow -up with 
regard to safety and efficacy awaits further experience.   
 
The ASCRS  guideline s tates the application of temperature -controlled radiofrequency  energy to 
the sphincter complex may be used to treat fecal incontinence. However, this is also a weak recommendation based on moderate -quality of evidence .  The ASCRS repor ts that most studies 
have been small single -center series with  short -term follow -up. Per the ASCRS , “Because of the 
limitations in the available data, alternative treatments should be pursued before considering radiofrequency energy delivery.”
1 
 American College of Gastroenterology  (ACG ) 
Regarding minimally invasive procedures for the treatment of fecal incontinence, the ACG  
concluded that minimally invasive procedures such as injectable anal bulking agents may have a role in patients with fecal incontinence who do not respond to conserv ative therapy.  However, 
they note this is a weak recommendation based on moderate -quality of evidence.  The ACG 
reported that there is insufficient evidence to recommend radiofrequency ablation treatment to the anal sphincter (SECCA) at this time .
4 
 Natio nal Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence  
An interventional proced ure guidance on injectable bulking agents for fecal incontinence  
concluded the current evidence on the safety and efficacy of injectable bulking agents for fecal incontinence does not  appear adequate for this procedure to be used without special 
arrangements for consent and for audit or research, which should take place in the context of a clinical trial or formal audit protocol that includes information on well- defined patient groups.
5 
 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists  (ACOG) 25A practice bulletin on fecal 
incontinence concluded that anal sphincter bulking agents may be effective in decreasing fecal incontinence episodes up to 6 months and can be considered as a short -term treatment option for 
fecal incontinence in women who have failed more conservative treatments.  However, this was 
based on limited or inconsistent scientific evidence (Level B)   
 
Coding Implications  
This clinical policy references Current Procedural Terminology (CPT
®). CPT® is a registered 
trademark of the Americ an Medical Association. All CPT  codes and descriptions are copyrighted 
2019, American Medical Association. All rights reserved. CPT  codes and CPT  descriptions are 
from the current m anuals and those included herein are not intended to be all -inclusive and are 
included for informational purposes only.  Codes  referenced in this c linical policy are for 
informational purposes only.  Inclusion or exclusion of any codes does not guarantee c overage.  
Providers should reference the most up- to-date sources of professional coding guidance prior to 
the submission of claims for reimbursement of covered services.  
 CLINICAL POLICY          
Fecal Incontinence Treatments  
 
Page 4 of 9  
CPT c odes that support medical necessity  
CPT® 
Codes  Description  
46750  Sphincteroplasty, anal, for incontinence or prolapse; adult  
46751  Sphincteroplasty, anal, for incontinence or prolapse;  child  
46760  Sphincteroplasty, anal, for incontinence or prolapse , adult; muscle transplant  
46761  Sphincteroplasty, anal, for incontinence or prolapse, adult;  levator  muscle 
imbrication (Park posterior anal repair)  
46999  Unlisted procedure, anus  
64561  Percutaneous implantation of neurostimulator electrodes; sacral nerve 
(transforaminal placement) including image guidance, if performed  
  
64581  Incision for implantation of neurostimulator electrodes; sacral nerve 
(transforaminal placement)  
64585  Revision or removal of peripheral neurostimulator electrodes  
64590  Insertion and replacement of peripheral or gastric neurostimulator pulse 
generator or receiver, direct or inductive coupling  
64595  Revision or removal of peripheral or gastric neurostimulator pulse generator or 
receiver  
95970  Electronic analysis of implanted neurostimulator pulse generator /transmitter 
[eg. contact group(s), interleaving, amplitude, pulse width, frequency [Hz], 
on/off cycling, burst, magnet mode, dose lockout, patient selectable 
parameters, responsive neurostimulation, detection algorithms, closed loop parameters, and passive parameters) by physician or other qualified health care professional; with brain, cranial nerve, spinal cord, peripheral nerve, or sacral 
nerve, neurostimulator pulse generator/transmitter, without programming    
95971  Electronic analysis of implanted neurostimulator pulse generator /transmitter 
system [ e.g. contact group( s), interleaving, amplitude, pulse width, frequency 
[Hz], on/off cycling, burst, magnet mode, dose lockout, patient selectable parameters, responsive neurostimulation, detection algorithms, closed loop parameters, and passive parameters ] by physician or other qualified health care 
professional; with simple spinal cord or peripheral nerve (eg, sacral nerve) neurostimulator pulse generator/transmitter programming by physician or 
other qualified health ca re professional  
95972  Electronic analysis of implanted neurostimulator pulse generator  /transmitter 
[eg, contact group ( s), interleaving, amplitude, pulse width, frequency [Hz], 
on/off cycling, burst, magnet mode, dose lockout, patient selectable paramete rs, responsive neurostimulation, detection algorithms, closed loop 
parameters, and passive parameters ] by physician or other qualified health care 
professional; with complex spinal cord or peripheral nerve (eg, sacral nerve) neurostimulator pulse generator/transmitter programming by physician or 
other qualified health care professional   
 HCPCS codes that support medical necessity  CLINICAL POLICY          
Fecal Incontinence Treatments  
 
Page 5 of 9  
HCPCS 
Codes  Description  
A4290  Sacral nerve stimulation test lead, each  
A4335  Incontinence supply; miscellaneous  
E0745  Neuromuscular stimulator, electronic shock unit  
L8680  Implantable neurostimulator electrode, each  
L8681  Patient programmer (external) for use with implantable programmable  
neurostimulator pulse generator, replacement only  
L8682  Implantable neurostimulator radiofrequency receiver  
L8683  Radiofrequency transmitter (internal) for use with implantable neurosti mulator 
radiofrequency receiver  
L8684  Radiofrequency transmitter (external) for use with implantable sacral root 
neurostimulator receiver for bowel and bladder management, replacement  
L8685  Implantable neurostimulator pulse generator, single array, recha rgeable, 
includes extension    
L8686  Implantable neurostimulator pulse generator, single array, nonrechargeable, 
includes extension  
L8687  Implantable neurostimulator pulse generator, dual array, rechargeable, 
includes extension  
L8688  Implantable neurostimulator pulse generator, dual array, nonrechargeable, 
includes extension  
L8689  External recharging system for battery (internal) for use with implantable 
neurostimulator, replacement only.  
 
ICD- 10-CM codes that support medical necessity  
ICD-10-CM Code  Description  
R15.0-R15.9  Fecal incontinence  
 CPT codes that do not support medical necessity  
CPT® 
Codes  Description  
64566  Posterior tibial neurostimulation, percutaneous needle electrode, single 
treatment, includes programming  
 HCPCS codes that do not support medical necessity  
HCPCS  
Codes  Description  
L8605  Injectable bulking agent, dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer implant, 
anal canal, 1 ml, includes shipping and necessary supplies  
 
 
Reviews, Revisions, and Approvals  Date  Approval 
Date  
Policy adopted from Health Net NMP3 25 Fecal Incontinence Treatments  11/16  12/16  CLINICAL POLICY          
Fecal Incontinence Treatments  
 
Page 6 of 9  
Reviews, Revisions, and Approvals  Date  Approval 
Date  
Removed criteria  and related background  for biofeedback treatment, as this 
was incorporated into CP.MP.168 Biofeedback .  06/17   
Added II.E . Vaginal bowel control (e.g, Eclipse system)  as investigational.   
References and codes reviewed and updated.    11/17  12/17  
Added that all other treatments are contraindicated in I.C.4 . Added age at 
least 4 years and previously achieved bowel control. References reviewed 
and updated . 10/18  11/18  
Added definition of severe FI to I.A for clarity.  Revised I.C.3.b.  To state ,  
" Failure of, or not a candidate for, medical interventions or surgical 
sphincter repair . " Added recommendation from ACOG to background.   
References reviewed and updated.  C PT code 46762 deleted.  Added CPT 
code 64566 and HPCPS code L8605 as codes that do not support medical 
necessity . Revised description of CPT codes 95970, 95971 and 95972. 
Reviewed by specialist. 11 11/19  11/19  
References  
1. Paquette IM, Varma MG, Kaiser AM, et al.  The American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons' Clinical Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Fecal Incontinence.  Jul 2015.  Available at:  
https://www.fascrs.org/sites/default/files/downloads/publication/clinical_practice_guideline_
for_the_treatment_of_fecal_incontinence.pdf  
2. Robson K.M, Lembo A.J.  Fecal incontinence in adults: Management .  In: Up ToDateTally 
NJ (Ed) UpToDate, Waltham, MA .  Accessed October 2 9, 2019.  
3. Mellgren A, Matzel KE, Pollack J, et al.  Long -term efficacy of NASHA Dx injection 
therapy for treatment of fecal incontinence.  Neurogastroen terol Motil. 2014 
Aug;26(8):1087- 94 
4. Wald A, Bharucha AE, Cosman BC, Whitehead WE.  ACG clinical guideline: management of benign anorectal disorders.  Am J Gastroenterol. 2014 Aug;109(8):1141 -57.  Available at:  
http://gi.org/guideline/management- of-benign -anorectal -disorders/
 
5. National  Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence.   Injectable bulking agents for fecal 
incontinence . Feb 2007.  Updated March 2010. Available at:  
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg210/documents/injectable -bulking -agents -for-faecal -
incontinence -interventional -procedures -consultation  
6. Hayes Health Technology Brief.  Solesta (NASHA Dx; Q -Med AB) for Treatment of Fecal 
Incontinence.  Oct 2014.  Update Aug. 2016.  Archived Nov 16, 2017 
7. Sanchez JE, Brenner DM, Franklin H, et al.  Validity of the ≥50% Re sponse Threshold in 
Treatment with NASHA/Dx Injection Therapy for Fecal Incontinence.  Clin Transl Gastroenterol. 2015 Jan 15;6:e70    
8. Lefebure B, Tuech JJ, Bridoux V, et al.  Temperature -controlled radio frequency energy 
delivery (Secca procedure) for the treatment of fecal incontinence: results of a prospective study.  .Int J Colorectal Dis. 2008 Oct;23(10):993- 7 
9. Ruiz D, Pinto RA, Hull TL , et al.  Does the radiofrequency procedure for fecal incontinence 
improve quality of life and incontinence at 1- year f ollow -up?  Dis Colon Rectum. 2010 
Jul;53(7):1041- 6 CLINICAL POLICY          
Fecal Incontinence Treatments  
 
Page 7 of 9  
10. Felt-Bersma RJ .  Temperature- controlled radiofrequency energy in patients with anal 
incontinence: an interim analysis of worldwide data.   Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf). 2014 
May;2(2):121- 5 
11. Lam TJ, Visscher AP, M eurs-Szojda MM, Felt -Bersma RJ.   Clinical response and 
sustainability of treatment with temperature -controlled radiofrequency energy (Secca) in 
patients with fecal incontinence: 3 years follow -up.  Int J Colorectal Dis. 2014 
Jun;29(6):755- 61 Monroy T1, Morales M, Garcia -Osogobio S  
12. Takahashi -Monroy T, Morales M, Garcia -Osogobio S , et al.  SECCA procedure for the 
treatment of fecal incontinence: results of five- year follow -up.  Dis Colon Rectum. 2008 
Mar;51(3):355- 9 
13. Efron JE, Corman ML, Fleshman J , et al.  Safety and effectiveness of temperature- controlled 
radio -frequency energy delivery to the anal canal (Secca procedure) for the treatment of fecal 
incontinence.  Dis Colon Rectum. 2003 Dec;46(12  
14. Sanchez JE, Brenner DM, Franklin H, et al.  Validity of the ≥ 50% Response Threshold in 
Treatment with NASHA/Dx Injection Therapy for Fecal Incontinence.  Clin Transl 
Gastroenterol. 2015 Jan 15;6:e70    
15. La Torre F, de la Portilla F.  Long -term efficacy of dextranomer in stabilized hyaluronic acid 
(NASHA/Dx) for treat ment of faecal incontinence.  Colorectal Dis. 2013 May;15(5):569- 74.  
16. Franklin H, Barrett AC, Wolf R.  Identifying factors associated with clinical success in patients treated with NASHA(®)/Dx injection for fecal incontinence.  Clin Exp Gastroenterol. 2016 Mar 2;9:41- 7 
17. Graf W, Mellgren A, Matzel KE, et al.  Efficacy of dextranomer in stabilised hyaluronic acid for treatment of faecal incontinence: a randomised, sham -controlled trial.  Lancet. 2011 Mar 
19;377(9770):997- 1003.  
18. Frascio M, Stabilini C, Casaccia M,  et al.  Radiofrequency Procedure (SECCA®) for Fecal 
Incontinence: One- Year Experience.   Surg Technol Int. 2017 Jul 25;30:97- 101. 
19. Visscher AP, Lam TJ, Meurs -Szojda MM, Felt -Bersma RJF.   Temperature -Controlled 
Delivery of Radiofrequency Energy in Fecal Incontinence: A Randomized Sham -Controlled 
Clinical Trial.   Dis Colon Rectum. 2017 Aug;60(8):860- 865. doi: 
10.1097/DCR.0000000000000861 
20. Al-Bayati I, Saadi M, Elhanafi S, McCallum RW .  Effectiveness of Bulking Agent (Solesta) 
Therapy in Fecal Incontinence in Patients Refractory to Conventional Therapies.  Am J Med Sci. 2017 Nov;354(5):476- 479. doi: 10.1016/j.amjms.2017.09.001. Epub 2017 Sep 5. 
21. van der Wilt AA, Giuliani G, Kubis C , et al.  Randomized clinical trial of percutaneous tibial 
nerve stimulation versus sham electrical stimulation in patients with faecal incontinence.   Br 
J Surg. 2017 Aug;104(9):1167- 1176. doi: 10.1002/bjs.10590. 
22. Richter HE, Matthews CA, Muir T, et al.  A vaginal bowel -control system for the treatment 
of fecal incontinence.   Obstet Gyne col. 2015 Mar;125(3):540- 7. doi: 
10.1097/AOG.0000000000000639 
23. Varma MG, Matthews CA, Muir T , et al.  Impact of a Novel Vaginal Bowel Control System 
on Bowel Function.  Dis Colon Rectum. 2016 Feb;59(2):127- 31. doi: 
10.1097/DCR.0000000000000517 
24. Hayes Health Technology Brief. Staged Approach to Sacral Nerve Stimulation for Treatment of Fecal Incontinence. December 2015. Updated December 2018.  
25. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) .  Practice Bulletin #210.  
Fecal Incontinence.  April 2019  CLINICAL POLICY          
Fecal Incontinence Treatments  
 
Page 8 of 9  
 
Important Reminder  
This clinical policy has been developed by appropriately experienced and licensed health care 
professionals based on a review and consideration of currently available generally accepted standards of medical practice; peer -reviewed medical literature; government agency/program 
approval status; evidence -based guidelines and positions of leading national health professional 
organizations; views of physicians practicing in relevant clinical areas affected by this clinical policy; and other a vailable clinical information. The Health Plan  makes no representations and 
accepts no liability with respect to the content of any external information used or relied upon in 
developing this clinical policy. This clinical policy is consistent with standar ds of medical 
practice current at the time that this clinical policy was approved. “Health Plan” means a health 
plan that has adopted this clinical policy and that is operated or administered, in whole or in part, by Centene Management Company, LLC, or any  of such health plan’s affiliates, as applicable.  
 The purpose of this clinical policy is to provide a guide to medical necessity, which is a component of the guidelines used to assist in making coverage decisions and administering benefits. It does not constitute a contract or guarantee regarding payment or results. Coverage decisions and the administration of benefits are subject to all terms, conditions, exclusions and limitations of the coverage documents (e.g., evidence of coverage, certificate of cove rage, policy, 
contract of insurance, etc.), as well as to state and federal requirements and applicable Health Plan-level administrative policies and procedures.    
 This clinical policy is effective as of the date determined by the Health Plan. The date o f posting 
may not be the effective date of this clinical policy. This clinical policy may be subject to applicable legal and regulatory requirements relating to provider notification. If there is a discrepancy between the effective date of this clinical po licy and any applicable legal or 
regulatory requirement, the requirements of law and regulation shall govern. The Health Plan 
retains the right to change, amend or withdraw this clinical policy, and additional clinical policies may be developed and adopted as needed, at any time.  
 This clinical policy does not constitute medical advice, medical treatment or medical care.  It is not intended to dictate to providers how to practice medicine. Providers are expected to exercise professional medical judgment in providing the most appropriate care, and are solely responsible for the medical advice and treatment of members.  This clinical policy is not intended to recommend treatment for members. Members should consult with their treating physician in connection wi th diagnosis and treatment decisions.  
 Providers referred to in this clinical policy are independent contractors who exercise independent judgment and over whom the Health Plan has no control or right of control.  Providers are not agents or employees of the Health Plan.  
 This clinical policy is the property of the Health Plan . Unauthorized copying, use, and 
distribution of this clinical policy or any information contained herein are strictly prohibited.  Providers, members and their representatives are bo und to the terms and conditions expressed 
herein through the terms of their contracts.  Where no such contract exists, providers, members CLINICAL POLICY          
Fecal Incontinence Treatments  
 
Page 9 of 9  
and their representatives agree to be bound by such terms and conditions by providing services to 
members and/or submi tting claims for payment for such services.   
 Note: For Medicaid members , when state Medicaid coverage provisions conflict with the 
coverage provisions in this clinical policy, state Medicaid coverage provisions take precedence. Please refer to the state Medicaid manual for any coverage provisions pertaining to this clinical 
policy.  
 
Note: For Medicare members, to ensure consistency with the Medicare National Coverage 
Determinations (NCD) and Local Coverage Determinations (LCD), all applicable NCDs , LCDs , 
and Medicare Coverage Articles should be reviewed prior to  applying the criteria set forth in this 
clinical policy. Refer to the CMS website at http://www.cms.gov  for additional information.  
 ©2016 Centene Corporation. All rights reserved.  All materials are exclusively owned by 
Centene Corporation and are protected by United States copyright law and international copyright law.  No part of this publication may be reproduced, copied, modified, distributed, displayed, st ored in a retrieval system, transmitted in any form or by any means, or otherwise 
published without the prior written permission of Centene Corporation. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice contained herein. Centene
® and Cen tene 
Corporation® are registered trademarks exclusively owned by Centene Corporation. 
 