   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 1 of 66 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT)  - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna  	 
Intraoperative Radiation Therapy 
 
(IORT) 
 
POLICY HISTORY 
Last Review: 09/29/2021 
Effective: 03/17/2006 
Next Review: 08/11/2022 
Review His tory 
Deﬁnitions 
Additional Information 
Clinical Policy Bulletin  
Notes Number: 0721 
POLICY 
*Please see amendment for Pennsylvania Medicaid at the end of this CPB. 
I.  
  
 Aetna  considers  intraoperative  radiation  therapy  (IORT)  medically  
necessary for the treatment of cervical cancer, colorectal 
cancer, soft tissue sarcoma (including retroperitoneal sarcoma),  
and uterine  cancer.  
II.Aetna  considers  the  use  of  single -fraction  electron -beam  IORT  at 
the  time  of  breast  conserving  surgery  (i.e.,  lumpectomy)  medically 
  
necessary for individuals with  breast cancer when the following  
 
selection criteria are  met: 
  
A.  Documented  diagnosis  of  early  stage  (0,  I or  II)  breast  cancer;  
and  
B.  Negative lymph nodes;  and  
C.  Technically clear surgical margins;  and  
D.  Used  to  treat  tumors  less  than  or  equal  to  5  cm  in  diameter.  
III. 	Aetna  considers  intraoperative  radiation  therapy  experimental  and 
investigational for the treatment of the following indications (not  
 
an all -inclusive  list)  because  its  eﬀectiveness  for  these  indications 
	 
has not been  established: 
        
 
 
 
 
          
         
         
      
 
     
             
            
           
            
   
         
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 2 of 66 
Brain  tumors  (e.g.,  glioblastomas)  and  brain  metastasis  
Cho
langiocarcinoma  
Conjunctival neoplasms  (e.g., lymphoma, sebaceous  
carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma)  
Gastric cancer  
Head  and  neck  cancers  (e.g.,  esophageal  cancer,  and  middle  
ear  tumors)  
Osteosarcoma 
Panc r
eatic cancer  
Pro
state cancer  
Ren
al cell carcinoma 
Spin
al metastases  
Sporadic renal angiomyolipoma  
Thymoma  
Vertebral metastases.  
See  also  CPB  0083  - Stereotactic  Radiosurgery  (../1_99/0083.html);  
CPB 0270 -  Proton Beam, Neutron Beam, and Carbon Ion  
Radiotherapy (../200_299/0270.html); CPB  0371 -  Brachytherapy  
(../300_399/0371.html);  CPB  0590  - Intensity  Modulated  Radiation  
Therapy  (../500_599/0590.html).  
BACKGROUND 
The usual method for delivering radiation is external beam with high-
energy photons. However, the external beam doses required to achieve 
local tumor control can exceed the radiation tolerance of some normal organs and other structures of the body. 
Intra-operative radiation therapy (IORT) is being investigated as a 
technique to deliver a high dose of radiation to a locally advanced tumor 
while attempting to protect adjacent normal tissues at the time of surgery. 
It is delivered with applicators and cones attached to the treatment head 
of high -energy medical linear accelerators. After all or most of the cancer 
is surgically removed, a large, single- dose of high -energy radiation is 
aimed directly at the tumor site. Nearby healthy tissue is protected with 
special shields.       
 
     
    
     
   
   
 
          
   
          
        
     
   
         
            
            
    
 
 
       
         
       
       
        
             
        
         
        
          
   
 
    
     
    
          
            
        
         
           Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 3 of 66 
The goal of IORT is to enhance local tumor control. Most patients 
receiving IORT are concurrently treated with high- dose external beam 
photon irradiation. The term “intraoperative radiation therapy” may also 
refer to intra -operative brachytherapy, the temporary or permanent 
implantation of radioactive seeds. 
Intra-operative radiation therapy is usually a component of a multi ­
disciplinary treatment approach for localized cancers that cannot be 
completely removed or that have a high risk of recurring in nearby 
tissues. For patients with colorectal cancer, IORT has been associated with i mproved local control. Several case series have demonstrated that 
adjuvant IORT has the potential to improve response rates with 
acceptable toxicities and improve survival with locally advanced colorectal 
cancer (Taylor et al, 2002; Ratto et al, 2003; Hashiguchi et al, 2003; 
Pacelli et al, 2004). Thus, the positive impact of IORT on local control of colorectal cancer appears to justify the inclusion of this therapeutic 
modality. 
Pacelli et al (2004) reported early and long- term results of pre -operative 
radiotherapy plus IORT to total mesorectal excision of middle and lower 
T3 rectal cancer patients (n = 113). Five- year, disease- specific survival 
was 81.4 % for those patients receiving pre- operative radiotherapy plus 
IORT (n = 69) compared to 58.1 % for thos e patients in the mesorectal 
excision group (n = 44). The rates of local recurrence at 5 years were 6.6 
% and 23.2 % in pre- operative radiotherapy plus IORT group and total 
mesorectal excision group, respectively. The authors concluded that pre­
operative radiotherapy plus IORT associated with total mesorectal 
excision reduced local recurrence rate and improved survival in T3 rectal 
cancer compared with total mesorectal excision alone. 
Persons from the American Society of Therapeutic Radiation and Oncology (ASTRO) have commented that “[c]urrently, it [IORT] is primarily used for treating rectal cancers, although in the near future it may be used for additional sites. Studies indicate that IORT might be used to treat head and neck, abdomen, and pelvic cancers, and cancers 
in the extremities. IORT can reduce the length of treatment. The 
Stanford Cancer Center states, 'In some cases, no further radiation 
treatment is required following IORT making it a much more convenient       
 
      
          
    
 
        
        
     
        
        
    
          
         
 
           
       
          
          
             
         
   
 
          
        
      
   
       
          
            
      
    
 
      
          
      
          
          
  
        
         Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 4 of 66 
approach for delivering therapy. Furthermore, physicians are able to 
shield surrounding organs from radiation, limiting side effects to healthy 
tissue" (Demanes and Rieke, 2005). 
The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Clinical Practice 
Guidelines for Oncology recommends IORT for colorectal cancers and 
uterine cancers. Regarding the use of IORT in colon cancer, NCCN 
guidelines state: “Intraoperative radiation therapy, if available, should be 
considered for patients with T4 or recurrent cancers as an additional boost. Preoperative radiation is preferred for these patients to aid 
resectability. If IORT is not available, low dose external beam radiation 
could be considered, prior to adjuvant chemotherapy” (NCCN, 2006). 
NCCN guidelines also recommend the use of IORT in selected rectal 
cancers: “Intraoperative radiation therapy, if available, should be considered for very close or positive margins after resection, as an additional boost especially for patients with T4 or recurrent cancers. If 
IORT is not available, 10 to 20 Gy external beam radiation to a limited 
volume could be considered soon after surgery, prior to adjuvant 
chemotherapy" (NCCN, 2006). 
Regarding the use of IORT for uterine cancers, NCCN guidelines state 
that: “For patients previously treated with external -beam RT, 
recommended salvage therapy includes pelvic exenteration with or 
without IORT, palliative radiotherapy, hormonal therapy, or 
chemotherapy. Radical surgery, such as pelvic exenteration, has been 
performed with reported survival rates approximating 20 %. For patients 
without prior RT to the site of recurrence, or with previous brachytherapy 
only, surgical exploration of pelvis and abdomen should be performed 
with or without IORT” (NCCN, 2005). 
NCCN guidelines also discuss the use of IORT in cervical cancers: 
“Patients with a localized recurrence of cervical cancer after surgery 
should be evaluated for salvage radiotherapy. Salvage rates of approximately 40 % have been reported in such situations. For patients who experience pelvic recurrences with no prior radiation therapy or who 
experience recurrences outside of the previously treated field, salvage therapy includes def initive pelvic radiation with or without platinum -based 
chemotherapy with or without brachytherapy. Patients with central pelvic       
 
        
          
    
             
        
      
    
      
          
          
    
        
  
 
        
           
     
  
           
      
        
        
        
       
          
 
              
        
           
        
           
         
        
      
       
   
         
           Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 5 of 66 
recurrent disease after radiation therapy should be evaluated for pelvic 
exenteration, with or without IORT (or, in carefully selected patients with 
small lesions, radical hysterectomy or interstitial reirradiation). Surgical 
mortality is generally 5 % or lower, with survival rates between 20 % and 
6 %. Concomitant measures with such radical procedures include 
adequate rehabilitation programs dealing with the psychosocial and psychosexual consequences of the operation and reconstructive procedures. Recurrence after pelvic exenteration should be treated with platinum -based chemotherapy or best supportive care or be enrolled in a 
clinical trial. Those with non-central disease should be treated with pelvic 
exenteration/laterally extended endopelvic resection/IORT, platinum -
based chemotherapy, best supportive care, or participation in a clinical trial” (NCCN , 2005). 
A review of IORT in the management of locally advanced gynecological 
malignancies by del Carmen et al (2000) reported that IORT can be 
utilized to maximize local tumor control. According to del Carmen and colleagues, “[r]eview of the available literature indicates that IORT may 
improve long-term local control and overall survival in women with pelvic 
sidewall and/or para- aortic nodal recurrence. The most encouraging 
results have been reported in cases with microscopic residual disease, following surgical debulking.” According to a more recent review by del Carmen and colleagues (2003), “[h]igher 5-year disease- free and overall 
survival rates have been documented in women who have microscopic residual disease, compared withthose who have gross residual disease.” 
Orecchia et al (2006) stated that IORT has been used in the treatment of 
various malignancies, mostly in combination with external beam radiation 
therapy. The long-term results suggest a positive impact on local controls 
that appear to be associated with increased survival. Modern IORT can be performed either with electron beams or photons, and has been used 
recently in early -stage cancer as a boost or as an exclusive treatment, 
especially for breast tumors, with extremely promising results. The results of different clinical studies have shown the feasibility of the technique and it is expected that its application will become more 
widespread in the immediate future. The authors noted that 
intraoperative electron radiotherapy in the treatment of initial- stage breast 
cancer may be an excellent alternative to external beam radiation therapy       
 
         
    
 
 
      
         
          
        
          
   
          
      
     
      
       
        
        
       
     
     
        
           
        
      
        
          
       
     
        
 
            
     
         
         
           
        
     
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 6 of 66 
in an appropriate selected group of patients; however, intensive long-term 
follow -up is needed to better assess local control and possible side 
effects. 
Sauer and colleagues (2007) stated that breast -conserving surgery 
followed by whole -breast radiotherapy (WBRT) has become the standard 
treatment for the majority of patients with early breast cancer. While the 
indications for systemic adjuvant treatment have continuously expanded, 
there is a tendency to restrict post-operative radiotherapy to accelerated 
partial breast irradiation (APBI) instead of WBRT. These investigators 
described various techniques of APBI; and their respective advantages or 
potential drawbacks. Moreover, they reviewed the scientific evidence in 
the literature, which forms the basis for the consensus statements and recommendations of the German Society of Radiation Oncology, the 
German Society of Senology, and the Working Group for Gynecological 
Oncology of the German Cancer Society. The methods mainly used for APBI are: interstitial radiotherapy with multi -catheter technique, IORT, the 
MammoSite, or 3 -D conformal external beam radiotherapy. These 
techniques have marked differences in dose distribution and 
homogeneity. The published range of local recurrence rates varies 
between 0 % to 37 %, the median follow -up from 8 to 72 months. The 
authors concluded that to-date, follow -up times mostly do not yet permit a 
definite judgment concerning the long- term effectiveness and side effects 
of APBI. The relevant societies in Germany support randomized clinical studies comparing APBI with WBRT in a well -defined subset of low -risk 
patients. Moreover, the authors expressly discouraged the routine use of 
APBI outside clinical trials. Until definite results show that APBI neither 
impairs therapeutic outcome nor cosmetic results, WBRT remains the 
gold standard in the treatment of early breast cancer. 
The conclusion by Sauer et al (2007) is in agreement with that of 
Mitsumori and Hiraoka (2008) who not ed that APBI is still an 
investigational treatment in Japan, and the optimal method of radiation 
delivery as well as its long-term safety and effectiveness should be 
ascertained in clinical trials. In this regard, Blohmer et al (2008) stated 
that ongoing prospective and randomized studies are investigating for 
which patients IORT is sufficient as the sole irradiation method after previous surgery.       
 
           
         
         
     
     
         
        
          
     
        
    
         
           
         
           
 
     
           
    
    
   
     
           
         
      
          
      
     
            
         
       
     
          
   
      
         
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 7 of 66 
Kalapurakal et al (2006) reported the findings of a phase I study in which 
IORT (first dose level of 10 Gy) with the photon radiosurgery system was 
used to treat children with recurrent brain tumors. A total of 14 children 
received IORT; 8 had been previously irradiated. Thirteen children had ependymoma. The median follow -up period was 16 months. Three 
patients (21 %) developed radiation necrosis on follow -up MRI scans 6 to 
12 months after IORT. They had not been previously irradiated and had received 10 Gy to a depth of 5 mm. One required surgery and the other 2 had resolution of their lesions without treatment. All 3 patients were asymptomatic at the last follow -up. No other late toxicity was observed at 
the last follow -up visit. Eight patients (57 %) had tumor control within the 
surgical bed after IORT. The authors concluded that these findings demonstrated the safety and feasibility of IORT to a dose of 10 Gy to 2 mm in children with previously irradiated brain tumors, while IORT to a dose of 10 Gy at 5 mm was associated with a greater complication rate. 
Bergenfeldt and Albertsson (2006) summar ized the development of 
adjuvant therapy for pancreatic cancer over the last 20 years. Four randomized controlled trials compared long- term survival of different 
treatments. The small GITSG -study supported combined 
chemoradiation, but the EORTC -study found no significant effect. A 
Norwegian study of adjuvant chemotherapy found an increased median survival, but no effect beyond 2 years. The large ESPAC -1 study showed 
a benefit for 5- FU based chemotherapy, while chemoradiation had a 
negative effect. Thus, evi dence favors adjuvant therapy, but 5- FU may 
not be the ultimate drug. Support for gemcitabine is given by preliminary data from a German randomized trial, and further American and European studies are upcoming. However, post -operative therapy is 
problemati c, as 20 to 30 % of resected patients never undergo treatment 
because of slow recovery or other reasons. Pre- operative therapy has 
some theoretical advantages, and moreover, patients with rapidly progressive disease may be spared surgery. Randomized contro lled 
trials are lacking, but published results compared well with post-operative, 
adjuvant therapy. The value of locally targeted therapy is difficult to assess. Reasonable results have been obtained with regional 
chemotherapy, whereas IORT does not seem to increase survival despite 
reducing local recurrences.       
 
       
       
       
       
         
      
     
      
     
      
         
         
      
        
      
             
   
  
 
          
   
       
       
      
       
         
       
      
        
         
       
     
          
      
            
          
           
         
           Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 8 of 66 
Ruano- Ravina et al (2008) evaluated the safety and effectiveness of 
IORT in pancreatic cancer. These investigators conducted a systematic 
review of scientific literature from January 1995 to February 2007, including Medline, Embase, ISI Web of Science and HTA (Health 
Technology Assessment). By applying a series of inclusion criteria, 2 
independent reviewers selected those studies in which a minimum of 30 
patients received IORT and which furnished survival results based on a minimum 3 -month follow -up. A tota l of 14 papers were included, 1 was 
an IORT assessment report, 5 were cohort studies, and the remaining 8 were case series studies, 2 of which belonged to the same series. In 
general, these studies showed that IORT could slightly increase survival 
among patients with pancreatic cancer in localized stages. However, the 
results were not conclusively in favor of IORT in the case of pancreatic 
cancer in locally advanced and metastatic stages. There were no 
published studies that assessed quality of life. The authors concluded 
that there is no clear evidence to indicate that IORT is more effective than 
other therapies in treating pancreatic cancer in locally advanced and 
metastatic stages. 
Showalter et al (2009) performed a retrospective analysis of patients who 
underwent pancreatico- duodenectomy (PD) between 1995 and 2005 to 
identify patients who underwent resection with and without IORT. Data 
collected included age, gender, complications, margin status, stage, survival, and recurrence. Unadjusted analyses of the IORT and non-
IORT groups were performed using Fisher's chi -square method for 
discrete variables and Wilcoxon rank sum test for continuous variables. 
To account for biases in patient selection for IORT, a propensity score 
was calculated for e ach patient and adjusted statistical analyses were 
performed for survival and recurrence outcomes. Between January 1995 
and November 2005, a total of 122 patients underwent PD for peri ­
ampullary tumors, including 99 pancreatic cancers. Of this group, 37 patients were treated with IORT, and there was adequate follow -up 
information for a group of 46 patients who underwent PD without IORT. 
The IORT group contained a higher percentage of Stage IIB or higher 
tumors (65 %) than in the non-IORT group (39.1 %), though differences in 
stage did not reach significance (p = 0.16). There was a non- significant 
decrease in the rate of loco- regional recurrence in patients who had IORT 
(39 % non- IORT versus 23 % IORT, p = 0.19). The median survival time 
of patients who received IORT was 19.2 months, which was not       
 
      
           
           
       
     
         
   
              
        
 
     
           
        
       
        
       
      
   
         
        
         
       
       
           
    
 
       
        
        
             
        
   
   
       
         
          
          
          
          Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 9 of 66 
significantly different than patients managed without IORT, 21.0 months 
(p = 0.78). In the propensity analyses, IORT did not significantly influence 
survival or recurrence after PD. The authors concluded that IORT can be 
safely added to management approaches for resectable pancreatic 
cancer, with acceptable morbidity and mortality. However, IORT did not 
improve loco- regional control and did not alter survival for patients with 
resected pancreatic cancer. In the future, IORT may be combined with novel therapeutic agents in the setting of a clinical trial in order to attempt 
to improve outcomes for patients with pancreatic cancer . 
Czito and colleagues (2006) stated that the prognosis of patients with 
biliary cancers is poor. Although surgery is potentially curative in selected 
patients, local recurrence is common. The use of adjuvant or neoadjuvant radiation therapy improves local control and possibly survival. In locally advanced patients, radiation therapy provides palliation 
and may prolong survival. Concurrently administered chemotherapy may 
further enhance these results. Newer radiation therapy techniques, including intra -luminal transcatheter brachytherapy, IORT, intensity -
modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), and 3-and 4-dimensional treatment 
planning, permit radiation dose escalation without significant increases in 
normal tissue toxicity, thus increasing the effective radiation dose. 
Preliminary results of studies employing hepatic transplantation with radiation therapy are encouraging. Although these new approaches hold promise, the prognosis in patients with biliary cancers remains poor, and the integration of novel therapeutic strategies is indicated. 
Tzeng et al (2006) noted that retroperitoneal soft -tissue sarcoma is an 
uncommon cancer that is difficult to treat because of its location and 
proximity to vital organs. Complete gross resection, often involving en bloc resection, is the standard of care as it represents the only treatment 
that improves overall survival. Unlike extremity sarcoma, retroperitoneal 
sarcoma tumor mortality is from local recurrence. Radiation therapy is 
the only adjuvant treatment that has improved local control in several institutional series. However, there remains no definitive prospective, randomized controlled study that establishes the role of adjuvant radiation 
versus no radiation. Owing to significant radiation morbidity with adjacent 
organs, especially the small intestine, there exists no consensus on radiation timing, delivery method or dosing. Recent and current protocols 
use pre- operative external -beam radiation with or without a method of       
 
        
        
         
         
    
 
       
    
       
     
      
         
 
              
         
            
   
         
         
          
         
        
         
            
          
    
       
       
             
           
 
 
          
           
        
         
           
      
          Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 10 of 66 
focal boost dosing. Methods of boost dosing include brachytherapy, 
IORT and IMRT. Further studies are needed to definitively include 
radiation therapy in the standard treatment of retroperitoneal soft-tissue 
sarcoma and to find the optimal balance between acceptable radiation 
toxicity and effective local control in treatment protocols . 
Ballo and colleagues (2007) assessed the clinical outcomes of patients with localized retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma (STS) treated with 
complete surgical resection and radiation. The medical records of 83 
patients were reviewed retrospectively; 60 patients presented with primary disease and the remaining 23 had recurrence after previous surgical resection. With a median follow -up of 47 months, the actuarial 
overall disease- specific survival (DSS), distant metastasis -free survival, 
and local control (LC) rates were 44 %, 67 %, and 40 %, respectively. Of 
the 38 patients dying of disease, local disease progression was the sole site of recurrence for 16 patients and was a component of progression for 
another 11 patients. Multi -variate analysis indicated that histological 
grade was associated with the 5 -year rates of DSS (low- grade, 92 %; 
intermediate -grade, 51 %; and high- grade, 41 %, p = 0.006). Multi ­
variate analysis also indicated an inferior 5 -year LC rate for patients 
presenting with recurrent disease, positive or uncertain resection margins, 
and age greater than 65 years. The data did not suggest an improved local control with higher doses of external -beam radiation therapy (EBRT) 
or with the specific use of IORT. Radiation- related complications (10 % at 
5 years) developed in 5 patients; all had received their EBRT post ­
operatively. The authors concluded that although pre- operative radiation 
therapy and aggressive surgical resection is well -tolerated in patients, 
local disease progression continues to be a significant component of disease death. In this small cohort of patients, the use of higher doses of 
EBRT or IORT did not result in clinically apparent improvements in outcomes. 
Patel and DeLaney (2008) noted that bone sarcomas are rare primary 
tumors. Radiation therapy (RT) can be useful in securing local control in 
cases where negative surgical margins cannot be obtained or where 
tumors are not resected. Recent technical advances in RT offer the 
opportunity to deliver radiation to these tumors with higher precision, thus 
allowing higher doses to the tumor target with lower doses to critical 
normal tissues, which can improve local tumor control and/or reduce       
 
        
          
   
      
      
         
   
       
          
   
  
       
 
 
       
           
       
           
          
         
      
            
            
            
       
        
           
 
       
       
        
     
         
          
           
           
    
    
        Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 11 of 66 
treatment -related morbidity. These researchers conducted a survey of 
recent technical developments that have been applied to RT for bone 
sarcomas. Radiation therapy techniques that show promise include 
intensity -modulated photon RT, 3-D conformal proton RT, intensity -
modulated proton RT, heavy charged- particle RT, IORT, and 
brachytherapy. All of these techniques permit the delivery of higher radiation doses to the target and less dose to normal tissue than had been possible with conventional 3- D conformal radiation techniques. 
Protons deliver substantially less dose to normal tissues than photons. 
The authors concluded that data from clinical studies using these 
advanced radiation techniques suggest that they can improve the 
therapeutic ratio (the ratio of local control efficacy to the risk of complications). 
In a feasibility study, Marucci et al (2008) evaluated the acute toxicity of 
IORT delivered as an "early boost" after tumor resection in patients with locally advanced head and neck cancer. A total of 25 patients were enrolled in the study. All patients underwent surgery with radical intent, 
and 17 had microvascular flap reconstruction. The IORT was delivered in 
the operating room; 20 patients received adjuvant EBRT. Five patients 
experienced various degrees of complications in the post -operative 
period, all of which were treated conservatively. One patient had a partial 
flap necrosis after EBRT that was treated with flap removal. Six deaths 
were recorded during the mean follow -up period of 8 months; none of the 
deaths was related to radiation treatment. The authors concluded 
that these findings showed that the use of IORT as an early boost is 
feasible with no increase in acute toxicity directly attributable to radiation. 
Perry et al (2010) reported the use of high- dose- rate IORT (HDR -IORT) 
for recurrent head- and-neck cancer (HNC) at a single institution. A total 
of 34 subjects with recurrent HNC received 38 HDR -IORT treatments 
using a Harrison-Anderson- Mick applicator with Iridium -192. A single 
fraction (median of 15 Gy; range of 10 to 20 Gy) was delivered intra-operatively after surgical resection to the region considered at risk for 
close or positive margins. In all patients, the target region was previously treated with EBRT (median dose of 63 Gy; range of 24 to 74 Gy). The 1­and 2-year estimates for in- field local progression-free survival (LPFS), 
loco-regional PF S (LRPFS), distant metastases -free survival (DMFS), 
and overall survival (OS) were calculated. With a median follow -up for       
 
            
       
         
       
       
              
           
         
      
      
         
       
           
 
            
          
           
         
         
         
    
       
      
         
          
             
             
      
              
        
               
          
          
     
         
           
           Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 12 of 66 
surviving patients of 23 months (range of 6 to 54 months), 8 patients (24 
%) are alive and without evidence of disease. The 1- and 2 -year LPFS 
rates are 66 % and 56 %, respectively, with 13 (34 %) in -field 
recurrences. The 1- and 2- year DMFS rates are 81 % and 62 %, 
respectively, with 10 patients (29 %) developing distant failure. The 1­and 2-year OS rates are 73 % and 55 %, respectively, with a median time 
to OS of 24 months. Severe complications included cellulitis (n = 5), 
fistula or wound complications (n = 3), osteo- radionecrosis (n = 1), and 
radiation -induced trigeminal neuralgia (n = 1). The authors concluded 
that HDR- IORT has shown encouraging local control outcomes in 
patients with recurrent HNC with acceptable rates of treatment -related 
morbidity. They stated that longer follow -up with a larger cohort of 
patients is needed to fully assess the benef it of this procedure. 
Drognitz et al (2008) retrospectively analyzed the impact of IORT on long­
term survival in patients with resectable gastric cancer. From 1991 to 2001, a total of 84 patients with gastric neoplasms underwent gastectomy 
or subtotal resection with IORT (23 Gy, 6 to 15 MeV; IORT -positive 
[IORT(+)] group). Patients with a history of additional neoadjuvant chemotherapy, histologically confirmed R1 or R2 resection, or reoperation 
with curative intention after local recurrence were excluded from further 
analysis. The remaining 61 patients were retrospectively matched with 61 patients without IORT (IORT -negative [IORT( -)] group) for Union 
Internationale Contre le Cancer (UICC) stage, patient age, histologic grading, ex tent of surgery, and level of lymph node dissection. 
Subgroups included post -operative UICC stages I (n = 31), II (n = 11), III 
(n = 14), and IV (n = 5). Mean follow -up was 4.8 years in the IORT(+) 
group and 5.0 years in the IORT( -) group. The overall 5 -year patient 
survival rate was 58 % in the IORT(+) group versus 59 % in the IORT( -) 
group (p = 0.99). Subgroup analysis showed no impact of IORT on 5­year patient survival for those with UICC stages I/II (76 % versus 80 %; p 
= 0.87) and III/IV (21 % versus 14 %, IORT(+) versus IORT( -) group; p = 
0.30). Peri -operative mortality rates were 4.9 % and 4.9 % in the IORT(+) 
versus IORT( -) group. Total surgical complications were more common in 
the IORT(+) than IORT( -) group (44.3 % versus 19.7 %; p < 0.05). The 
loco-regional tumor recurrence rate was 9.8 % in the IORT(+) group. The 
authors concluded that use of IORT was associated with low loco­      
 
           
         
 
 
           
           
      
              
          
      
    
          
             
           
              
        
         
          
     
          
      
        
             
  
 
             
        
       
       
      
      
       
       
         
         
   
      
               
           Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 13 of 66 
regional tumor recurrence, but had no benefit on long-term survival while 
significantl y increasing surgical morbidity in patients with curable gastric 
cancer. 
In a phase I -II study, Saracino et al (2008) examined the use of IORT 
following radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. A total of 34 patients 
with localized prostate cancer with only 1 risk factor (Gleason score 
greater than or equal to 7, Clinical Stage [cT] greater than or equal to 2c, 
or prostate- specific antigen [PSA] of 11 to 20 ng/ml) and without clinical 
evidence of lymph node metastases were treated with radical prost atectomy (RP) and IORT on the tumor bed. A dose -finding 
procedure based on the Fibonacci method was employed. Dose levels of 
16, 18, and 20 Gy were selected, which are biologically equivalent to total 
doses of about 60 to 80 Gy administered with conventional fractionation, 
using an alpha/beta ratio value of 3. At a median follow -up of 41 months, 
24 (71 %) patients were alive with an undetectable PSA value. No patients died from disease, whereas 2 patients died from other malignancies. Loco- regional failures were detected in 3 (9 %) patients, 2 
in the prostate bed and 1 in the common iliac node chain outside the 
radiation field. A PSA rise without local or distant disease was observed 
in 7 (21 %) cases. The overall 3- year biochemical progression- free 
survival rate was 77.3 %. The authors concluded that this dose- finding 
study showed the feasibility of IORT in prostate cancer also at the highest 
administered dose. 
In a phase II clinical study, Lemanski et al (2010) examined the feasibility 
and the effectiveness of IORT as an alternative to conventional boost 
radiation after breast -conserving surgery in elderly patients. These 
investigators included 94 patients older than 65 years. Among them, 42 patients presented with all the inclusion criteria, i.e., stages pT0 to pT1 and pN0, ductal invasive unifocal carcinoma, and tumor -free margin of 
greater than 2 mm. Intra- operative radiation therapy was delivered using 
a dedicated linear accelerator. One 21- Gy fraction was prescribed and 
specified at the 90 % isodose, using electrons. In- vivo dosimetry was 
performed for all patients. The primary end point was the quality index. Secondary end points were quality -of-life, local recurrences, cosmetic 
results, and specific and overall rates of survival. The median follow -up 
was 30 months (range of 12 to 49 months), and median age was 72 years 
(range of 66 to 80 years). The median tumor diameter was 10 mm. All       
 
      
         
     
       
        
     
   
  
      
     
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 14 of 66 
patients received the total prescribed dose. No acute grade 3 toxicities 
were observed. End points for all but 1 patient corresponded to 
acceptable quality index criteria. Pre- treatment quality -of-life scores were 
maximal, and no significant decrease was observed during follow -up. 
Cosmesis was good to excellent at 6 months. Two patients experienced 
recurrence but underwent salvage mastectomy. The authors concluded 
that these findings confirm that exclusive partial -breast IORT is feasible 
for treating early -stage breast cancer in the elderly. Intra- operative 
radiation therapy may be considered an alternative treatment for a 
selected population and offers a safe 1- step treatment. 
In  a prospective,  randomi zed,  non-inferiority trial, Vaidya et   al (2010)  
compared targeted IORT  versus  whole breast radiotherapy for  breast  
cancer.  Women aged 45 years  or  older  with  invasive  ductal  breast  
carcinoma undergoing breast -conserving  surgery  were  enrolled  from  28 
centers  in  9 countries.  Patients  were  randomly  assigned in  a 1:1  ratio  to  
receive targeted IORT or  whole  breast  EBRT,  with  blocks  stratified  by  
center  and by  timing of  delivery  of  targeted IORT. Neither  patients  nor  
investigators  or  their  teams  were  masked  to  treatment  assignment.  Post­ 
operative  discovery  of  pre-defined  factors  (e.g.,  lobular  carcinoma)  could 
trigger  addition  of  EBRT  to targeted  IORT (in  an expected 15  %  of  
patients).  The primary  outcome was  local  recurrence  in  the conserved 
breast.  The  pre-defined  non-inferiority  margin  was  an  absolute  difference  
of  2.5  %  in  the  primary  endpoint.  All  randomized  patients  were included 
in the intention-to -treat  analysis.  A total  of  1,113 patients  were  randomly  
allocated to targeted  IORT and 1,119 were  allocated to EBRT.  Of  996 
patients  who  received  the  allocated  treatment  in  the  targeted  IORT  group,  
854 (86 %)  received targeted IORT  only  and 142  (14 %)  received 
targeted  IORT plus  EBRT.  In the EBRT group,  1,025 (92  %)  patients  
received the allocated treatment. At  4 years, there were 6 l  ocal  
recurrences in the  IORT group and 5  in  the  EBRT  group.  The Kap lan- 
Meier  estimate  of  local  recurrence  in  the  conserved  breast  at  4  years  was  
1.20  %  (95  %  confidence  interval  [CI]:  0.53  to  2.71)  in  the  targeted  IORT 
and  0.95  %  (0.39  to  2.31)  in  the  EBRT  group  (difference  between  groups  
0.25 %,  -1.04 to 1.54;  p =  0.41).  The frequency  of  any  complications  and  
major  toxicity  was  similar  in the 2  groups  (for  major  toxicity,  targeted 
IORT,  37  [3.3  %]  of  1,113  versus  EBRT,  44 [3.9  %]  of  1,119;  p  =  0.44).  
Radiotherapy  toxicity  (Radiation  Therapy  Oncology  Group grade  3)  was 
lower in the targeted IORT  group (6 patients [0.5 %]) than in the        
 
        
         
             
        
  
 
          
           
      
      
           
       
         
          
           
        
       
        
          
        
        
           
  
 
      
    
      
    
      
     
       
     
         
     
    
      
        
     Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 15 of 66 
external EBRT group (23 patients [2.1 %]; p = 0.002). The authors 
concluded that for selected patients with early breast cancer, a single 
dose of radiotherapy delivered at the time of surgery by use of targeted 
IORT should be considered as an alternative to EBRT delivered over several weeks. 
Wenz and associates (2010) developed a novel approach to deliver IORT 
during kyphoplasty and reported the first treated case, which dealt with a 
60-year old patient with metastasizing breast cancer who under 
chemotherapy and later presented with a newly diagnosed painful metastasis in the 12th thoracic vertebra. Under general anesthesia, a bi­
pedicular approach into the vertebra was chosen with insertion of 
specially designed metallic sleeves to guide the electron drift tube of the miniature X-ray generator. This was inserted with a novel sheet designed 
for this approach protecting the drift tube. A radiation dose of 8 Gy in 5­mm dis tance (50 kV X -rays) was delivered. The kyphoplasty balloons 
were inflated after IORT and polymethylmethacrylate cement was injected. The whole procedure lasted less than 90 minutes. The authors concluded that this novel, minimally invasive procedure can be performed 
in standard operating rooms and may become a valuable option for patients with vertebral metastases providing immediate stability and local 
control. They noted that a phase I/II study is under way to establish the optimal dosage. 
Marchioro et al (2012) noted that intra- operative electron beam 
radiotherapy (IOERT) for prostate cancer is a radiotherapeutic technique, giving high -doses of radiation during radical prostatectomy (RP). These 
investigators presented the published treatment approaches for IORT analyzing functional outcome, morbidity, and oncological outcome in patients with clinical intermediate -high-risk prostate cancer. A systematic 
review of the literature was performed, searching PubMed and Web of Science. A "free text" protocol u sing the term intraoperative radiotherapy 
and prostate cancer was applied. A total of 10 records were retrieved and analyzed including more than 150 prostate cancer patients treated with 
IOERT. The authors concluded that IOERT represents a feasible 
technique with acceptable surgical time and minimal toxicity. They stated that a greater number of cases and longer follow -up time are needed in 
order to assess the long-term side effects and oncological outcome.       
 
      
          
        
                
            
    
       
          
            
    
 
           
     
        
       
  
   
       
    
    
           
       
      
       
       
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 16 of 66 
Ruano- Ravina et al (2012) evaluated the safety and effectiveness of 
IORT for early breast cancer through a systematic review. A total of 15 
studies met the inclusion criteria. Most studies assessed the combined treatment with IORT (10 to 24 Gy) and EBRT (45 to 50 Gy) on early stage 
breast cancer (T(0- 2)). Local control was over 95 % for 1 and 4 years of 
follow -up and the 5- year OS was 99 %. The TARGIT -A study found a 
similar survival comparing IORT with standard treatment. The incidence of acute and chronic complications was scarce. IORT is well-tolerated by 
patients and acute and late toxicities are low. There are no differences in 
survival for IORT -treated patients versus standard treatment . 
Zurrida et al (2012) stated that wide tumor resection plus post-operative 
whole breast irradiation is standard treatment for early breast cancer. Irradiation decreases recurrence rates, but may cause poor cosmesis, breast pain, and cardiac and lung toxicity. Accelerated partial breast irradiation is increasingly used in the hope of increasing convenience, 
decreasing sequelae and maintaining cure rates. Intra- operative 
radiotherapy with electrons is an attractive accelerated partial breast 
irradiation technique because collimator placement is under the direct control of the surgeon who removes the tumor, the skin is spared, 
shielding protects the chest wall and complete irradiation can be given in 
a single intra -operative session (avoiding 5 to 7 weeks of whole breast 
irradiation). The authors concluded that IORT with electrons seems as 
safe as whole breast irradiation; however, long- term results on local 
control and survival are not available yet. 
The American  Co
 llege of  Radiology  (ACR)'s  Appropriateness  Criteria® on 
"Conservative surgery  and radiation  -- stage I  and II  breast  carcinoma"  
(Bellon  et  al,  2011)  stated  that  "[t]here has  also been interest  in  single-  
fraction intraoperative  radiation  therapy  (using  either  electrons  or  low- 
energy  photons). At  present, however, there ar  e v ery limited follow -up 
data,  and th is  remains  an  experimental  approach.  Accrual  is  ongoing  to a  
phase III trial cosponsored by the National Surgical Bowel  and Breast  
Program  and the  Radiation Therapy  Oncology  Group (RTOG®) 
randomizing  patients  with  stage 0- II  cancer  who  have undergone 
lumpectomy  to either  whole- breast  irradiation  or  PBI.  There  are other  
randomized  trials  ongoing in  Canada and  Europe examining  this  
question,  but  their  results  are  several  years  away".        
 
      
        
          
         
        
        
        
            
       
          
     
       
       
        
  
          
         
          
     
    
 
         
        
         
       
      
            
     
              
         
   
          
        
     
        
   Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 17 of 66 
Hershko et al (2012) described their experience with intra-operative 
electron radiotherapy (IOeRT) at the Rambam Health Care Campus in 
Haifa since they began utilizing this modality in 2006. From April 2006 to September 2010, 31 patients affected by unifocal invasive duct breast carcinoma less than or equal to 2 cm diameter received wide local 
resection followed by intra-operative radiotherapy with electrons. Patients 
were evaluated for early and late complications, and other events, 1 month after surgery and every 3 months thereafter for the duration of the 
first 2 years. After a mean follow -up of 36 months, 7 patients developed 
mild breast fibrosis and 3 suffered from mild post-operative infection. Rib 
fractures were observed in 4 patients before routine lead shielding was initiated. Additional whole -breast irradiation was given to 4 patients. 
None of the patients developed local recurrences or other ipsilateral cancers. Similarly, no contralateral cancers or distant metastases were 
observed. The authors concluded that intra- operative electron 
radiotherapy may be an alternative to external beam radiation therapy in 
an appropriate selected group of early -stage breast cancer patients. 
Moreover, they stated that long-term results of clinical trials are required 
to better evaluate the indications and utility of this technique in the 
management of breast cancer. 
Leonardi et al (2012) evaluated late toxicity and cosmetic outcome after 
intra-operative radiotherapy using electrons (ELIOT) as sole treatment 
modality in early breast cancer patients. A total of 119 patients selected 
randomly among 1,200 cases was analyzed. Late toxicities were documented using the LENT -SOMA scoring system, cosmesis was 
evaluated with the Harvard scale, and a numeric rating scale was used to 
assess symptoms. After a median follow -up of 71 months, grade II 
fibrosis was observed in 38 patients (31.9 %) and grade III fibrosis in 7 patients (5.9 %). Post- operative complications (12.6 %) did not correlate 
with late toxicity. Physicians and patients scored cosmesis as excellent 
or good in 84 % and 77.3 % of the cases, respectively. Patient satisfaction was higher than 90 %. The authors concluded that in the study, ELIOT gives low and acceptable long- term toxicity. They stated 
that a longer follow -up and a larger number of patients are needed to 
confirm these promising results.       
 
            
          
         
       
          
       
   
              
               
         
     
             
          
     
    
 
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 18 of 66 
Maluta et al (2012) reported the results of a single -institution, phase II trial 
of accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) using a single dose of 
intraoperative electron radiation therapy (IOERT) in patients with low-risk 
early stage breast cancer. A cohort of 226 patients with low -risk, early 
stage breast cancer were treated with local excision and axillary 
management (sentinel node biopsy with or without axillary node 
dissection). After the surgeon temporarily re- approximated the excision 
cavity, a dose of 21 Gy using IOERT was delivered to the tumor bed, with 
a margin of 2 cm laterally. With a mean follow -up of 46 months (range of 
28 to 63 mont hs), only 1 case of local recurrence was reported. The 
observed toxicity was considered acceptable. The authors concluded that APBI using a single dose of IOERT can be delivered safely in women 
with early, low -risk breast cancer in carefully selected patients. Moreover, 
they stated that a longer follow -up is needed to ascertain its efficacy 
compared to that of the current standard treatment of whole- breast 
irradiation. 
Sawaki et  al  (
 2014) stated that IORT is  under  evaluation in br  east- 
conser ving s urgery  because the feasibility of the IORT procedure  
including  transportation of  the patient  under  general  anesthesia  is  not  
well-established.  Thus,  this  prospective  single -center  pilot  study  aimed  to 
test the feasibility of IORT at  a single  dose  of  21  Gy  in Japanese breast  
cancer  patients.  The primary  endpoint  was  early  toxicity;  the  secondary  
endpoint was late  toxicity. Patients with  histologically  or  cytologically 
proven  primary  early  breast  cancer  were eligible.  Inclusion criteria  were  
as  follows:  (i)  T  <  2.5  cm;  (ii)  desire  for  breast -conserving  surgery;  (iii)  
age  greater than  50 years; (iv) surgical margin greater than 1 cm; (v)  
intra -operative pathologically free margins; and (vi) sentinel node  
negative.  Exclusion criteria w  ere  (i) contraindications to radiation  
therapy; (ii) past radiation  therapy for the same breast or chest; (iii)  
extensive intra -ductal component; and (iv) a tumor located in the  
axillary tail of the breast.  All  patients  gave  written  informed consent .  
Partial  resection  was  performed  with  at  least  a  margin  of  1  cm  around  the 
tumor.  The  patient  was  transported  from  the  surgical  suite  to  the  radiation 
room.  Radiation  at  21 Gy  was  delivered  directly  to  the mammary  gland.  
Toxicity  was  evaluated  with  the  Common  Terminology  Criteria  for  Adverse  
Events  V4.0.  A total  of  5 patients  were  enrolled  in  this  pilot  study  and 
received  21  Gy.  Follow -up  ranged  from  7.8  to  11.0  months  (median  of        
 
        
         
     
               
            
      
            
     
   
            
           
 
            
     
     
     
  
            
     
       
           
         
       
             
        
          
            
       
    
  
 
         
        
            
   
        
         
         
    Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 19 of 66 
10.2). Intraoperative transportation to the radiation room during the 
surgical procedure under general anesthesia was performed safely in all 
patients. Treatment -related toxicities within 3 months were deep 
connective tissue fibrosis (grade 1, n = 3) and pain (grade 1, n = 3). 
There was no case of wound infection, wound dehiscence, or soft tissue 
necrosis. Overall, there was no severe adverse event. The authors 
concluded that the procedure was tolerated very well in this first group of 
Japanese female patients treated with IORT, as was the case with 
European women. They stated that a longer follow -up is needed for the 
evaluation of any potential late side effects or recurrences; and a phase II 
study is now being conducted for the next group of patients. 
Engel et al (2013) noted IORT with low-energy x-rays is increasingly used 
in breast -conserving therapy (BCT). Previous non- randomized studies 
have observed mammographic changes in the tumor bed to be more pronounced after IORT. The purpose of this study was to re- assess the 
post-operative changes in a randomized single -center subgroup of 
patients from a multi -center trial (TARGIT- A). In this subgroup (n = 48) 27 
patients received BCT with IORT, 21 patients had BCT with standard 
whole -breast radiotherapy serving as controls. Overall 258 post ­
operative mammograms (median follow -up of 4.3 years, range of 3 to 8) 
were retrospectively evaluated by 2 radiologists in consensus focusing on 
changes in the tumor bed. Fat necroses showed to be significantly more 
frequent (56 % versus 24 %) and larger (8.7 versus 1.6 sq cm, median) after IORT than those in controls. Scar calcifications were also 
significantly more frequent after IORT (63 % versus 19 %). The authors 
stated that the high incidence of large fat necroses in this study confirmed 
previous study findings. However, the overall higher incidence of calcifications in the tumor bed after IORT represents a new finding, requiring further attention. 
Vanderwalde et al (2013) performed a phase II study of pre- excision 
IORT for early -stage breast cancer. Patients greater than or equal to 48 
years of age with invasive ductal carcinoma, less than or equal to 3 cm, and clinically node- negative were eligible for this study, w hich was 
approved by institutional review board. Ultrasound was used to select 
electron energy and cone size to cover the tumor plus 1.5 to 2.0 cm 
lateral margins and 1 cm deep margins (90 % isodose). Fifteen Gy was delivered with a Mobetron irradiator, and immediate needle -localized       
 
       
        
        
        
        
           
     
       
       
          
            
           
           
         
      
       
    
   
 
          
             
        
         
   
 
            
          
   
          
      
       
        
     
      
        
    
              Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 20 of 66 
partial mastectomy followed. Local event results were updated using the 
Kaplan- Meier method. A total of 53 patients received IORT alone. 
Median age was 63 years, and median tumor size was 1.2 cm. Of these, 
81 % were positive for estrogen receptor or progesterone receptor, 11 % were positive for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, and 15 % 
were triple -negative. Also, 42 %, 49 %, and 9 % would have fallen into 
the Suitable, Cautionary, and Unsuitable groups, r espectively, of the 
American Society of Therapeutic Radiation Oncology consensus 
statement for accelerated partial breast irradiation. Median follow -up was 
69 months. Ipsilateral events occurred in 8 of 53 patients. The 6- year 
actuarial rate of ipsilateral events was 15 % (95 % CI: 7 % to 29 %). The 
crude event rate for Suitable and Cautionary groups was 1 of 22 (5 %) and 7 of 26 (27 %), respectively. Overall survival was 94.4 %, and breast cancer -specific survival was 100 %. The authors concluded that the rate 
of local events in this study is a matter of concern, especially in the 
Cautionary group. On the basis of these findings, pre- excision IORT, as 
delivered in this study, may not provide adequate local control for less 
favorable early -stage breast cancers. 
An UpToDate review on “Role of radiation therapy in breast conservation 
therapy” (Pierce and Sabel, 2013) does not mention the use of IORT as a 
management tool. Furthermore, the NCCN’s clinical practice guideline on 
“Breast cancer” (Version 3.2013) does not mention IORT as a management fool for breast conservation. 
Zygogianni et al (2012) noted that pancreatic cancer is rarely curable, and 
the OS rate at 5 years is under 4 %. This study aimed to assess the efficacy, effectiveness and safety of IORT as treatment in pancreatic 
cancer, by means of a systematic review of the literature. These investigators searched Pubmed from 1980 until 2010 by means of 
prospective randomized trials. The aim was to assess the potential 
impact of IORT on local control, quality of life and OS. The search was 
restricted to articles published in English. Intra- operative radiation 
therapy offers the opportunity to administer high -doses of irradiation to 
areas of neoplastic involvement while attempting simultaneously to spare 
normal tissues in the region from potentially damaging radiation exposure. However, the results were not in favor of IORT in the case of       
 
       
            
         
 
          
          
          
        
          
    
          
       
        
        
     
        
         
         
      
           
        
         
      
            
       
         
      
   
     
           
    
 
         
    
         
        
          
         
             Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 21 of 66 
pancreatic cancer in locally advanced and metastatic stages. The 
authors concluded that there is no clear evidence to indicate that IORT is 
more effective than other therapies in treating pancreatic cancer. 
Niewald et al (2009) retrospectively evaluated the results after a regimen 
of surgery, IORT, and external beam radio -therapy (EBRT) for soft-tissue 
sarcomas. A total of 38 consecutive patients underwent IORT for soft -
tissue sarcoma; 29 were treated for primary tumors, 9 for r ecurrences. 
There were 14 cases with liposarcomas, 8 with leiomyosarcomas, 7 with 
malignant fibrous histiocytomas; 27/38 tumors were located in the 
extremities, the remaining ones in the retro -peritoneum or the chest. 
Radical resection was attempted in all patients; a R0-resection was achieved in 15/38 patients, R1 in 12/38 pats and R2 in 4/38 pats. IORT 
was performed using a J -125 source and a HDR (high dose rate) after -
loading machine after suturing silicone flaps to the tumor bed. The total 
dose applied ranged from 8- 15 Gy/0.5 cm tissue depth measured from 
the flap surface. After wound healing, EBRT was applied in 31/38 patients with total doses of 23- 56 Gy dependent on resection status and 
wound situation. The mean duration of follow -up was 2.3 years. A local 
recurrence was found in 10/36 patients, lymph node metastases in 2/35, 
and distant metastases in 6/35 patients. The actuarial local control rate was 63 %/5 years. The overall survival rate was 57 %/5 years. Ther e 
was no statistically significant difference between the results after treatment for primaries or for recurrences. Late toxicity to the skin was found in 13/31 patients, wound healing problems in 5/31 patients. A 
neuropathy was never seen. The authors concluded that the combination 
of surgery, IORT, and EBRT yields favorable local control and survival 
data, which were well within the range of the results reported in the 
literature. The complication rates, however, are considerable although the complications are not severe, they should be taken into account when 
therapy decisions are made. 
Call et al (2014) reviewed outcomes for patients who received IORT for 
upper -extremity sarcoma. These investigators identified patients with 
upper -extremity tumors who were treated with EBRT, surgery, and IORT, 
with or without chemotherapy. Kaplan- Meier estimates for overall survival 
(OS), central control (CC), local control (LC), and distant control (DC) were obtained. A total of 61 patients were identified. Median age was 50 
years (range of 13 to 95 years). Median follow -up was 5.9 years. Eleven       
 
            
           
         
            
            
     
            
             
               
            
          
     
        
          
       
     
 
          
           
           
           
         
             
          
        
     
 
         
     
      
      
   
 
         
         
      
      
    
       Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 22 of 66 
patients had gross (R2; n = 1) or microscopic (R1; n = 10) disease at the 
time of IORT. IORT doses ranged from 7.50 to 20.00 Gy. External beam 
radiotherapy doses ranged from 19.80 to 54.00 Gy. OS at 5 and 10 years was 72 % and 58 %, respectively. LC at 5 and 10 years was 91% and 88%, respectively. DC at 5 and 10 years was 80% and 77%, respectively. 
Patients treated for recurrent disease had inferior 5-year OS compared 
with patients with first diagnoses (63% vs. 74%; P=0.02) and lower 5-year 
LC (67 % versus 94 %; p < 0.01). For patients with R1 or R2 resections, LC at 5 and 10 years was 100 % and 86 %, respectively; for patients with 
R0 resections, LC was 89 % at both 5 and 10 years (p = 0.98). Severe 
toxicity attributable to treatment was noted for 4 patients (7 %). The 
authors concluded that for upper -extremity sarcoma, treatment including 
IORT was associated with excellent LC, limb preservation, and survival. LC rates were excellent for patients with positive margins after resection. 
Patients with recurrent disease had worse outcomes, but limb 
preservation was achievable for most patients. 
An UpToDate review on “Local treatment for primary soft tissue sarcoma 
of the extremities and chest wall” (Delaney et al, 2013) states that “For patients treated preoperatively, 50 Gy is administered in 25 fractions over 
five weeks followed three to four weeks later by a conservative resection. 
A boost dose to 66 Gy may be given postoperatively or intraoperatively 
for microscopically positive margins and to 75 Gy if there is gross residual 
disease. In patients with frozen section evidence of close or positive 
margins, a boost can be delivered by placement of brachytherapy catheters or intraoperative electron beam radiation therapy ”. 
Also, NCCN’s clinical practice guideline on “Soft tissue sarcoma” (Version 
1.2013) states that “Advances in RT technology such as brachytherapy, 
intensity -modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), andintraoperative radiation 
therapy (IORT) have led to the improvement of treatment outcomes in patients with STS”. 
Sedlmayer et al (2013) evaluated the outcome after partial breast re-irradia tion for in-breast tumor recurrence (IBTR) following second breast 
conserving surgery (BCS) as alternative to salvage mastectomy. A survey of the literature was performed including publications between 2002 and 2012 (PubMed). Strategies comprised partial b reast 
radiotherapy by external beam radiotherapy (EBRT), interstitial       
 
     
     
           
           
       
           
          
       
         
         
          
             
         
      
  
  
        
    
           
            
       
           
      
       
   
          
        
 
      
      
           
         
    
         
        
       
     
       
          Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 23 of 66 
brachytherapy (BT) in low -, high -and pulse- dose rate technique, 
combined EBRT/BT, and IORT. Published evidence is scarce, with 
altogether 10 articles identified, in sum reporting about 310 patients. The 
vast majority (82 %) was treated by brachytherapy. Selection criteria for a 
second breast conservation attempt were comparable within all reports: 
all women presented with T0-2 recurrent lesions, late onset after primary 
treatment (70 months, mean of means) and no evidence of metastatic 
disease before undergoing gross tumor resection with free surgical margins. Treatment doses were in a similar range for brachytherapy (LDR 30 to 55 Gy, HDR 30 to 34 Gy; PDR 40 to 50 Gy), biologically 
comparable to the only series exclusively using EBRT (50 Gy). Follow -up 
times amounted 49 months (mean of the means, range of 21 to 89). 
Oncologic results were similar among the different methods with local control rates ranging between 76 % and 100 %, and disease free and 
overall survival rates comparable to mastectomy series. Acute toxicity 
was low in all cohorts. All authors reported cosmetic outcome, scoring 
results from excellent -to-good in 60 to 80 % of patients, mostly without 
using standardized evaluation schemes. Major late effects were fibrosis in re-irradiated parenchyma as a function of dose and volume, asymmetry 
(primarily due to double surgery), and breast pain. There were hardly any 
G3 and no G4 late reactions noted. The authors concluded that in a 
highly selected group of patients with IBTR, partial breast irradiation after 
second BCS is a viable alternative to mastectomy, yielding high breast preservation rates without compromising oncologic safety. Whereas the evidence for brachytherapy is more solid, there is still little information 
about the effectiveness of PBI via EBRT or novel strategies like IORT, 
which therefore should preferably be investigated within trials. 
Shah et al (2014) analyzed the cost -efficacy of IORT compared with 
whole -breast irradiation (WBI) and accelerated partial -breast irradiation 
(APBI) for early -stage breast cancer. Data for this analysis came from 2 
phase III trials: the TARGIT (Targeted Intraoperative Radiotherapy) trial 
and the ELIOT (Electron Intraoperative Radiotherapy) trial. Cost analyses included a cost-minimization analysis and an incremental cost-
effectiveness ratio analysis including a quality -adjusted life-year (QALY) 
analysis. Cost analyses were performed comparing IORT with WBI 
delivered using 3- dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3D -CRT), APBI 
3D-CRT, APBI delivered with intensity -modulated radiotherapy (IMRT), 
APBI single -lumen (SL), APBI multi -lumen (ML), and APBI interstitial (I).       
 
             
              
            
              
       
             
           
           
          
       
        
    
        
        
          
        
  
 
           
    
       
     
      
      
        
           
   
      
        
     
     
         
     
       
           
     
         
             
             Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 24 of 66 
Per 1,000 patients treated, the cost savings with IORT were $3.6 to $4.3 
million, $1.6 to $2.4 million, $3.6 to $4.4 million, $7.5 to $8.2 million, and 
$2.8 to $3.6 million compared with WBI 3D -CRT, APBI IMRT, APBI SL, 
APBI ML, and APBI I, respectively, with a cost decrement of $1.6 to $2.4 
million compared with APBI 3D-CRT based on data from the TARGIT 
trial. The costs per QALY for WBI 3D -CRT, APBI IMRT, APBI SL, APBI 
ML, and APBI I compared with IORT were $47,990 to $60,002; $17,335 
to $29,347; $49,019 to $61,031; $108,162 to $120,173; and $36,129 to 
$48,141, respectively, based on data from the ELIOT trial. These results 
were consistent with APBI and WBI being cost -effective compared with 
IORT. The authors concluded that based on cost-minimization analyses, 
IORT represents a potential cost savings in the management of early -
stage breast cancer. However, absolute reimbursement is misleading, 
because when additional medical and non- medical costs associated with 
IORT are factored in, WBI and APBI represent cost-effective modalities 
based on cost -per-QALY analyses. They (WBI and APBI) remain the 
standard of care. 
Vaidya et al (2014) stated that the TARGIT -A trial compared risk-adapted 
radiotherapy using single- dose targeted intraoperative radiotherapy 
(TARGIT) versus fractionated EBRT for breast cancer. These investigators reported 5- year results for local r ecurrence and the first 
analysis of OS. TARGIT -A was a randomized, non-inferiority trial. 
Women aged 45 years and older with invasive ductal carcinoma were enrolled and randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive TARGIT or whole -breast EBRT, with blocks stratified by center and by timing of 
delivery of targeted intraoperative radiotherapy: randomization occurred 
either before lumpectomy (pre- pathology stratum, TARGIT concurrent 
with lumpectomy) or after lumpectomy (post -pathology stratum, TARGIT 
given subsequently by reopening the wound). Patients in the TARGIT 
group received supplemental EBRT (excluding a boost) if unforeseen 
adverse features were detected on final pathology, thus radiotherapy was 
risk-adapted. The primary outcome was absolute difference in local 
recurrence in the conserved breast, with a pre- specified non-inferiority 
margin of 2.5 % at 5 years; pre- specified analyses included outcomes as 
per timing of randomization in relation to lumpectomy. Secondary outcomes included complications and mortality. Patients were enrolled at 
33 centers in 11 countries, between March 24, 2000, and June 25, 2012. 
A total of 1,721 patients were randomized to TARGIT and 1,730 to EBRT.       
 
 
    
  
  
          
       
        
          
          
      
      
       
           
   
          Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 25 of 66 
Supplemental  EBRT  after  TARGIT  was necessary  in  15.2 %  [239  of  
1,571]  of  patients  who  received  TARGIT  (21.6  %  pre-pathology,  3.6  %  
post-pathology).  A total  of  3,451 patients  had a  median  follow -up of  2 
years  and 5  months  (IQR  12  to 52  months),  2,020 of  4  years,  and 1,222  
of  5 years.  The 5-y ear  risk for local  recurrence in the conserved br  east  
was  3.3 %  (95 %  CI:  2.1 to  5.1)  for  TARGIT  versus  1.3 %  (0.7  to 2.5)  for  
EBRT  (p  = 0.042).  TARGIT  concurrently  with lumpectomy  (pre-pathology,  
n  =  2,298)  had  much  the  same  results  as  EBRT:  2.1  %  (1.1  to  4.2)  versus  
1.1  %  (0.5  to  2.5;  p  =  0.31).  With  delayed  TARGIT  (post -pathology,  n  = 
1,153)  the  between- group  difference  was  larger  than  2.5  %  (TARGIT  5.4  
%  [3.0  to  9.7]  versus  EBRT  1.7  %  [0.6  to  4.9];  p  =  0.069).  Overall,  breast 
cancer  mortality  was  much  the  same  between  groups  (2.6  %  [1.5  to  4.3]  
for  TARGIT  versus  1.9  %  [1.1  to  3.2]  for  EBRT;  p  =  0.56)  but  there  were 
significantly  fewer  non-breast -cancer  deaths  with  TARGIT  (1.4  %  [0.8  to 
2.5]  versus  3.5 %  [2.3 to 5.2];  p  =  0.0086),  attributable  to  fewer  deaths  
from  cardiovascular  causes  and  other  cancers.  Overall  mortality  was  3.9  
%  (2.7  to  5.8)  for  TARGIT  versus  5.3  %  (3.9  to  7.3)  for  EBRT  (p  =  0.099).  
Wound- related  complications  were  much  the  same  between groups  but  
grade  3  or  4  skin  complications  were  significantly  reduced  with  TARGIT  (4 
of  1,720  versus  13 of  1,731,  p  =  0.029).  The authors  concluded  that  
TARGIT  concurrent  with lumpectomy  within  a  risk-adapted approach 
should  be  considered  as  an  option  for  eligible  patients  with  breast  cancer  
carefully  selected  as  per  the  TARGIT -A  trial  protocol,  as  an  alternative  to 
post-operative  EBRT.  
Alvar
ado et al (2014) stated that the TARGIT -A Trial is an international 
randomized, prospective trial comparing IORT for equivalence to EBRT 
following lumpectomy for invasive breast cancer in selected low -risk 
patients; early results suggested that outcomes are similar. In addition to 
effectiveness data and cost considerations, the preferences of patients 
should help inform practice. This study was undertaken to explore and 
quantify preference in choosing between IORT and the current standard, 
EBRT. Eligible subjects were current or past candidates for breast -
conserving surgery and radiation being seen at the Universi ty of 
California, San Francisco Breast Care Center. A trade- off technique 
varying the risk of local recurrence for IORT was used to quantify any 
additional accepted risk that these patients would accept to receive either 
treatment. Patients were first pres ented with a slideshow comparing 
EBRT with the experimental IORT option before being asked their       
 
     
      
         
         
            
       
       
  
          
            
     
   
          
   
 
          
        
            
    
 
        
            
 
 
       
        
           
         
            
             
     
          
          
      
       
          
       
             
         Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 26 of 66 
preferences given hypothetical 10-year local recurrence risks. Patients 
were then given a questionnaire on demographic, social and clinical 
factors. Data from 81 patients were analyzed. The median additional 
accepted risk to have IORT was 2.3 % ( -9 to 39 %), mean 3.2 %. Only 7 
patients chose to accept additional risk for EBRT; 22 accepted IORT at no 
additional risk; and the remaining 52 chose IORT with some additional risk. Patients weigh trade -offs of risks and benefits when presented with 
medical treatment choices. The authors concluded that these findings showed that the majority of breast cancer patients will accept a small increme nt of local risk for a simpler delivery of radiation. Moreover, they 
stated that further studies that incorporate outcome and side effect data from the TARGIT -A trial clarify the expected consequences of a local 
recurrence, and include an expanded range of radiation options that could 
help guide clinical decision making in this area. 
UpToDate reviews on “Overview of the treatment of newly diagnosed, 
non-metastatic breast cancer” (Taghian et al, 2014) and “Treatment 
protocols for breast cancer” (Brenner et al, 2014) did not mention IORT 
as a management tool. 
Furthermore, NCCN’s clinical practice guideline on “Breast cancer” 
(Version 3.2014) does not mention the use of IORT as a management 
tool. 
Habl and colleagues (2013) analyzed their experience with IOERT 
followed by moderate doses of EBRT in patients with locally recurrent 
renal cell carcinoma. From 1992 to 2010, a total of 17 patients with histologically proven, locally recurrent renal cell carcinoma (median tumor 
size of 7 cm) were treated by surgery and IOERT with a median dose of 
15 Gy. All patients met the premise of curative intent including 7 patients 
with oligo -metastases at the time of recurrent surgery, which were 
resected and/or irradiated. The median time interval from primary surgery 
to local recurrence was 26 months; 11 patients received additional 3D ­
conformal EBRT with a median dose of 40 Gy. Surgery resulted in free 
but close margins in 6 patients (R0), while 9 patients suffered from microscopic (R1) and 2 patients from macroscopic (R2) residual disease. 
After a median follow -up of 18 months, 2 local recurrences were 
observed, resulting in an actuarial 2-year local control rate of 91 %. Eight 
patients developed distant failures, predominantly to liver and bone,       
 
        
      
      
        
        
   
     
    
         
        
  
    
 
 
        
            
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 27 of 66 
resulting in an actuarial 2 -year PFS of 32 %. An improved PFS rate was 
found in patients with a larger time interval between initial surgery and 
recurrence (greater than 26 months) . The actuarial 2- year OS rate was 
73 %. Lower histological grading (G1/2) was the only factor associated with improved OS. Peri -operative complications were found in 4 patients; 
no IOERT specific late toxicities were observed. The authors concluded that c ombination of surgery, IOERT and EBRT resulted in high local 
control rates with low toxicity in patients with locally recurrent renal cell cancer despite an unfavorable surgical outcome in the majority of patients. However, PFS and OS were still limited due to a high distant 
failure rate, indicating the need for intensified systemic treatment 
especially in patients with high tumor grading and short interval to recurrence. 
Also, NCCN’s clinical practice guideline on “Kidney cancer” (Version 
3.2014) does not mention the use of IORT as a management tool. 
Silverstein  et  al  (2014a)  rep
 orted  that  2  randomized  IORT  trials  for  early - 
stage  breast  cancer  were  recently  published.  The ELIOT  Trial  used 
electrons  (IOERT),  and the  TARGIT -A Trial  Update used  50-kV X -rays  
(IORT).  These studies  were compared for  similarities  and differences.  
The  results  were  analyzed  and  used  to  determine  which  patients  might  be 
suitable for single -dose treatment.  The primary sources of  data w ere the  
ELIOT  Trial  and TARGIT -A  Trial,  as  well  as  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  
the  peer-reviewed  literature  of  APBI  using  50-kV  X-rays  or  electrons.  
Studies  published  or  presented prior  to March 2014 were  analyzed  for  
efficacy,  patient  restrictions,  complications,  and  outcome.  With  a  median 
follow -up of  5.8 years,  the 5-year  recurrence r  ates for ELIOT versus  
EBRT  patients  were  4.4  %  and 0.4  %,  respectively,  p  =  0.0001.  A low - 
risk  ELIOT  group was  identified  with  a  5-year  recurrence  rate of  1.5 %.  
With  a  median  follow -up  of  29  months,  the  5-year  recurrence  rates  for  the 
TARGIT -A  versus  EBRT  patients  were  3.3  %  and  1.3  %,  respectively,  p  =  
0.042.  The authors  concluded that  with  5.8 years  of  median  follow -up,  
IOERT  appears  to  have  a subset  of  low-risk  women for whom IOERT is  
acceptable.  With 29  months  of  median follow -up the  results  of  IORT  with  
50-kV devices  are  promising,  but  longer  follow -up data are  needed.  They  
stated that  at the c  urrent time, single- fraction IOERT  or IORT  patients 
should  be treated  under  strict  institutional  protocols.        
 
 
    
          
           
  
    
    
  
       
      
       
        
   
   
        
         
              Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 28 of 66 
Esposito  et  al  (2015)  noted that  IORT  constitutes  a  paradigm  shift  from  
the conventional  3  to  5 weeks  of  whole -breast  EBRT.  Intra-operative  
radiotherapy  enables  delivery  of  radiation at  the time  of  excision  of  the 
breast tumor, targeting the area at   highes t risk  of recurrence, while  
minimizing excessive radiation  exposure  to  healthy  breast  tissue.  The 
rationale for  IORT is  based on the  observation  that  over  90  %  of  local  
recurrences  after  breast -conserving  surgery  occur  at  or  near  the  original  
operation  site.  These  investigators  reviewed  trials  of  IORT  delivered  with 
different techniques  and de vices. Intra- operative radiotherapy is  a very  
attractive opt  ion for  delivering radiotherapy,  reducing the traditional  
fractionated  treatment  to  a  single  fraction  admin istered at  the time of  
surgery.  It  has  been shown to  be associated  with  reduced toxicity  and  
has  several  potential  benefits  over  EBRT.  Only  2  randomized clinical  
trials  (RCTs)  have  been published to- date.  The  TARGIT -A  and ELIOT  
trials  have  demonstrated  that  IORT  is  associated  with  a  low  rate  of  local 
recurrence,  although  higher  than  that  after  EBRT  (TARGIT -A:  3.3  versus  
1.3 %  respectively,  p  =  0.042;  ELIOT:  4.4  versus  0.4  %,  p  <  0.001).  
However,  the  local  recurrence  rate  for  IORT  fell  within  the  predefined  2.5  
%  non-inferiority  margin  in  TARGIT -A,  and  the  7.5  %  equivalence  margin 
in  ELIOT.  The  authors  concluded  that  longer  follow -up  data  from  existing  
trials,  optimization  of  patient  criteria  and  cost-effectiveness  analyses  are 
needed.  
Giordano 
et al (2014) noted that glioblastoma multi -forme (GBM) is the 
most frequent primary malignant brain tumor in adults. Despite multi -
modal therapies, almost all GBM recur within a narrow margin around the 
initial resected lesion. Thus, novel therapeutic intensification strategies 
must target both, the population of dispersed tumor cells around the 
cavity and the post -operative microenvironment. Intra- operative 
radiotherapy is a pragmatic and effective approach to sterilize the 
margins from per sistent tumor cells, abrogate post -injury proliferative 
stimuli and to bridge the therapeutic gap between surgery and radio-chemotherapy. These researchers have set up INTRAGO, a phase I/II 
dose- escalation study to evaluate the safety and tolerability of IORT 
added to standard therapy in newly diagnosed GBM. In contrast to 
previous approaches, the study involves the application of isotropic low -
energy (kV) x -rays delivered by spherical applicators, providing optimal 
irradiation properties to the resection cavity. INTRAGO includes patients 
aged 50 years or older with a Karnofsky performance status of at least 50       
 
         
         
         
          
      
        
           
         
      
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 29 of 66 
% and a histologically confirmed (frozen sections) supra-tentorial GBM. 
Safety and tolerability (i.e., the maximum tolerated dose, MTD) will be 
assessed using a classical 3 + 3 dose- escalation design. Dose-limiting 
toxicities (DLT) are wound healing deficits or infections requiring surgical 
intervention, IORT -related cerebral bleeding or ischemia, symptomatic 
brain necrosis requiring surgical intervention and early termination of 
EBRT (before the envisaged dose of 60 Gy) due to radiotoxicity. 
Secondary end- points are PFS and OS. The study is registered with 
clinicaltrials.gov, number:NCT02104882 (Registration Date: 03/26/2014). 
Wernicke  et  al  (2014)  noted  t hat  resected  brain  metastases  (BrMs)  have  
a  high  rate  of  local  recurrence  without  adjuvant  therapy.  Adjuvant  whole - 
brain  radiotherapy  remains  the standard of  care  with  a local  control  rate  
greater  than  90 %.  However,  whole- brain radiotherapy  is delivered over  
10  to  15  days,  which  can  delay  other  therapy  and  is  associated  with  acute 
and long-term toxicities. Permanent  cesium -131 ((131)Cs) implants  can  
be  used  at  the  time  of  metastatic  resecti on,  thereby  avoiding  the  need  for 
any  additional therapy. In a phas   e I/II  clinical trial, these researchers  
evaluated the  safety,  feasibility,  and efficacy  of  a novel  therapeutic  
approach with  permanent  (131)Cs  brachytherapy  at  the resection for  
brain  meta stases.  After  institutional  review  board  approval  was  obtained,  
24  patients  with  a  newly  diagnosed  metastasis  to  the  brain  were  accrued 
to  a  prospective  protocol  between  2010  and  2012.  There  were  10  frontal, 
7  parietal,  4  cerebellar,  2  occipital,  and 1  temporal BrMs.  Histology  
included lung cancer  (n =  16),  breast  cancer  (n =  2),  kidney  cancer  (n  =  
2),  melanoma  (n  =  2),  colon  cancer  (n  =  1),  and  cervical  cancer  (n  =  1).  
Stranded (131)Cs  seeds  were  placed  as  permanent  volume implants.  
The prescription  dose  was  80 Gy  at  a 5-mm  depth from the resection  
cavity  surface.  Distant  metastases  were treated  with  stereotactic  
radiosurgery  (SRS)  or  whole- brain  radiotherapy,  depending  on the  
number  of  lesions.  The primary  end-point  was local (resection cavity)  
freedom  from  progression  (FFP).  Secondary  end-points  included  regional  
FFP,  distant  FFP,  median  survival,  OS,  and  toxicity.  The  median  follow -up 
was  19.3  months  (range  of  12.89  to  29.57  months).  The  median  age  was  
65 years  (range of  45  to 84  years).  The median  size  of  resected tumor  
was  2.7 cm  (range of  1.5  to 5.5 cm),  and the median  volume of  resected 
tumor  was  10.31 cm(3)  (range of  1.77 to  87.11  cm(3)).  The median 
number  of  seeds  used  was  12  (range  of  4  to  35),  with  a  median  activity  of  
3.82  mCi  per  seed (range of  3.31 to  4.83  mCi)  and total  activity  of 46.91        
 
 
         
        
     
          
       
      
         
           
                 
          
           
             
                  
             
         
            
          
             
       
      
       
        
         
           
           Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 30 of 66 
mCi (range of 15.31 to 130.70 mCi). Local FFP was 100 %. There was  1 
adjacent  leptomeningeal  recurrence,  resulting  in  a  1-year  regional  FFP  of  
93.8  %  (95  %  CI:  63.2  %  to  99.1  %).  One- year  distant  FFP  was  48.4  % 
(95  %  CI:  26.3  %  to  67.4  %).  Median  OS  was  9.9  months  (95  %  CI:  4.8  
months,  upper  limit  not  estimated)  and  1-year  OS  was  50.0  %  (95  %  CI:  
29.1  %  to  67.8  %).  Complications  included CSF  leak  (n =  1),  seizure  (n  =  
1),  and infection (n =  1).  There  was  no radiation necrosis.  The authors  
concluded that  the  use of  post-resection  permanent  (131)Cs  
brachytherapy  implants  resulted  in  no local  recurrences  and  no radiation  
necrosis. This treatment was  safe, well -tolerated,  and convenient for  
patients,  resulting in a s  hort radiation treatment  course, high r  esponse  
rate,  and minimal toxicity.  They  stated that these findings  merit further  
study  with a multi -center trial.  
In a non
-randomized, prospective study, Weil et al (2015) examined the 
feasibility of IORT using a portable radiation source to treat newly 
diagnosed, surgically resected, solitary BrM. A total of 23 patients with 
histologically confirmed BrM were treated with an Intra-beam device that 
delivered 14 Gy to a 2- mm depth to the resection cavity during surgery. 
In a 5 -year minimum follow -up period, PFS from the time of surgery with 
simultaneous IORT averaged (± SD) 22 ± 33 months (range of 1 to 96 
months), with survival from the time of BrM treatment with surgery+IORT 
of 30 ± 32 months (range of 1 to 96 months) and OS from the time of first 
cancer diagnosis of 71 ± 64 months (range of 4 to 197 months). For the 
Graded Prognostic Assessment (GPA), patients with a score of 1.5 to 2.0 
(n = 12) had an average post -treatment survival of 21 ± 26 months (range 
of 1 to 96 months), those with a score of 2.5 to 3.0 (n = 7) had an average 
post-treatment survival of 52 ± 40 months (range of 5 to 94 months), and 
those with a score of 3.5 to 4.0 (n = 4) had an average post -treatment 
survival of 17 ± 12 months (range of 4 to 28 months). A BrM at the 
treatment site recurred in 7 patients 9 ± 6 months post -treatment, and 5 
patients had new but distant BrM 17 ± 3 months after surgery+IORT. Six 
patients later received whole- brain radiation therapy, 7 patients received 
radiosurgery, and 2 patients received both treatments. The median 
Karnofsky Performance Scale scores before and 1 and 3 months after 
surgery were 80, 90, and 90, respectively; at the time of this writing, 3 patients remain alive with a central nervous system (CNS) progression-
free survival of greater than 90 months without additional BrM treatment. 
The authors concluded that the findings of this study demonstrated the       
 
              
           
          
   
     
 
 
       
        
      
           
            
         
       
       
          
           
      
           
      
        
          
           
        
     
             
           
          
      
       
          
           
         
               
      
           
       
      
          Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 31 of 66 
feasibility of resection combined with IORT at a dose of 14 Gy to a 2-mm 
peripheral margin to treat a solitary BrM. Local control, distant control, 
and long-term survival were comparable to those of other commonly used 
modalities. They stated that surgery combined with IORT seems to be a 
potential adjunct to patient treatment for CNS involvement by systemic 
cancer. 
In a retrospective case- series study, Marr and colleagues (2015) 
described the results of patients with diffuse conjunctival neoplasms 
treated with radioactive phosphorus 32 (32P) -impregnated flexible film. 
This study was conducted between January 1, 2010, and January 1, 2013 
at Memorial Sloan- Kettering Cancer Center. A total of 7 eyes (6 patients) 
were treated for diffuse conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma, sebaceous 
carcinoma, or lymphoma that had recurrent or residual disease after primary treatment. Patients underwent mapping biopsies and detailed conjunctival drawings to delineate the pathologic extent of the disease. 
The brachytherapy film used for treatment was the RIC Conformal Source 
Model 100 (RIC -100, RI Consultants). The RIC -100 is a flexible, thin 
(approximately 0.5-mm) film made of a polymer chemically bound to 32P. 
The radioactive 32P film was pla ced intra- operatively, allowed to stay in 
place until the prescription dose was reached, and then removed. The 
median dose at the prescription point (1 mm from the surface of the film) 
was 15 Gy (range of 5 to 17 Gy). Patients were tested for best -corrected 
visual acuity (BCVA), recurrence-free survival, and adverse events scored 
by using the Adult Comorbidity Evaluation- 27 scale. Between 2010 and 
2013, 7 eyes of 6 patients were treated. The median age of patients was 
70 years. All patients had a recurrent or persistent neoplasm: 4 patients with squamous cell carcinoma, 1 with sebaceous carcinoma, and 1 with metachronous bilateral lymphomas were treated. The median treatment time was 19 minutes (range of 10 to 52 minutes). The median follow -up 
was 24.9 months (range of 3.1 to 38.2 months). Recurrence-free survival 
24 months after brachytherapy was 75 % (95 % CI: 19 to 89.1). Two 
moderate adverse events and 1 severe adverse event occurred. Visual acuity was stable or improved in 5 of the 7 eyes (i.e., better than 20/70 in 
the 5 patients who retained their treated eye). The authors concluded that these findings showed the use of an intra-operative high-dose rate of 
32P brachytherapy in selected cases of recalcitrant diffuse conjunctival neoplasms. They stated that this technique offers a novel adjunct in the 
treatment of these cancers; further follow -up and study are needed.       
 
 
       
       
     
           
     
 
     
        
       
       
       
     
            
      
      
       
      
            
       
 
          
  
         
          Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 32 of 66 
Pancreatic Cancer 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network’s clinical practice guideline on 
”Pancreatic adenocarcinoma” (Version 1.2016) states that “The role of 
IORT is controversial …. Overall, there is no clear established role for IORT in patients with pancreatic cancer, and the panel believe it should 
only be performed at specialized centers”. 
Cai et al (2013) evaluated long- term outcomes, intra- operative radio- 
therapy (IORT) -related toxicity, and prognostic factors for overall survival 
(OS) among patients with unresectable locally advanced pancreatic cancer (LAPC) who received IORT as part of their treatment at the 
Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). Medical records were reviewed 
for 194 consecutive patients with unresectable LAPC who were treated with IORT at MGH between 1978 and 2010; OS was calculated using the 
Kaplan- Meier method. Prognostic factors were evaluated at the 
univariate level by the log -rank test and at the multi -variate level by the 
Cox proportional hazards model. Rates of disease progression and 
treatment toxicity were calculated. The 1-year, 2- year, and 3-year 
survival rates were 49 %, 16 %, and 6 %, respectively; 6 patients (3 %) 
survived for more than 5 years. The median OS was 12.0 months. 
Among  183 pati
 ents  with  known post -IORT  disease status, the 2-year  
local  progression-free  survival  (PFS)  and  distant  metastasis -free  survival 
rates  were  41 %  and  28 %,  respectively.  On multi -variate  analysis,  an  
IORT  applicator  diameter  less  than  or  equal  to  8  cm  (hazards  ratio  [HR], 
0.51;  95  %  confidence interval  [95  %  CI]:  0.30  to 0.84  [p  =  .009]),  a  
Charlson  age-comorbidity  index  less  than  or  equal  to  3  (HR,  0.47;  95  % 
CI:  0.31  to  0.73  [p  =0  .001]),  and  receipt  of  chemotherapy  (HR,  0.46;  95  
%  CI:  0.33  to 0.66  [p <  0.001])  predicted  improved  OS.  The median OS 
for  patients  with  all  3  positive  prognostic  factors  was  21.2  months.  The 
authors  concluded  that  well-selected patients  with  LAPC  with small  
tumors  and  low  Charlson  age-comorbidity  indices  can  achieve  good  long- 
term  survival  outcomes  with a t reatment regimen that incorporates  
chemotherapy  and  IORT.  
This st
udy had several drawbacks: It is a single -institution, retrospective 
study with significant treatment heterogeneity; these researchers were unable to assess several potentially valuable prognostic factors such as 
performance status; and the patient cohort was fairly homogeneous, with       
 
           
         
      
      
      
             
  
 
           
         
        
        
      
       
    
         
        
       
    
       
   
      
       
        
       
       
           
         
         
      
             
       
          
          
       
        
       
         
     Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 33 of 66 
a relatively small number of patients in the patient groups with poor 
prognostic factors. Nevertheless, as what to the authors’ knowledge was 
the largest study in the literature to- date to examine patients with LAPC 
who were treated with IORT, the current study offered new insight into 
some simple clinical guidelines that may help to identify those patients with LAPC who are most likely to achieve long-term survival after a multi -
modality treatment regimen. 
Keane et al (2016) stated that improved outcomes with FOLFIRINOX or 
gemcitabine with nab-paclitaxel in the treatment of metastatic pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) have prompted incorporation of these regimens 
into neoadjuvant treatment of locally advanced unresectable PDAC. 
Whereas some patients remain unresectable on surgical exploration, 
others are able to undergo resection after intensive neoadjuvant 
treatment. These researchers evaluated outcomes and toxicity 
associated with use of intensive neoadjuvant treatment followed by IORT 
in combination with resection or exploratory laparotomy. These investigators retrospectively analyzed patients with locally advanced 
unresectable or borderline -resectable PDAC who received intensive 
neoadjuvant treatment with induction chemotherapy and chemo ­
radiotherapy followed by exploratory laparotomy in an IORT -equipped 
operating suite between 2010 and 2015. Surgical outcomes and overall 
survival (OS) were compared. Of 68 patients, 41 (60.3 %) underwent 
resection, 18 (26.5 %) had unresectable disease, and 9 (13.2 %) had 
distant metastases. Of 41 resectable patients, 22 received IORT for 
close/positive resection margins on intra-operative frozen section. There 
was no significant difference in operative times or morbidity with addition 
of IORT to resecti on. Median OS was 26.6 months for all patients who 
underwent resection, 35.1 months for patients who underwent resection 
and IORT, and 24.5 months for patients who underwent resection alone 
(p = NS). Of 18 patients with unresectable disease, all but 1 received IORT, with median OS of 24.8 months. IORT was associated with 
increased hospital stay (4 versus 3.5 days), but no significant difference 
in operative times or morbidity. The authors concluded that IORT in addition tointensive neoadjuvant chemotherapy and chemo- radiotherapy 
was not associated with increased toxicity when used with resection or exploratory laparotomy, and was associated with encouraging survival rates in patients with close/positive margins and patients with 
unresectable disease. Moreover, they stated that further follow -upis       
 
         
       
    
 
 
      
         
        
       
           
        
          
   
  
         
         
          
            
        
          
      
     
        Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 34 of 66 
needed, but these improved results suggested that certain patients with 
well-controlled systemic disease may benefit from aggressive local 
therapy that includes IORT; prospective trials are ongoing. 
This  study  had s everal  drawbacks:  (i) it is a retrospective, single - 
institution study, and patient numbers were small (n =  22). This may  
have  limited  power  to  see  a diﬀerence  in  toxicities  with  addition  of  
IORT  to  resection  or  surgical  exploration,  (ii)  as  these  researchers  only 
had access to patients who were scheduled for surgical exploration,  
they could not assess patients  who  progressed during neoadjuvant  
treatment.  This  spoke  to  the  importance  of  rigorous  re-staging  before 
surgical exploration, as there were patients who will progress during  
neoadjuvant treatment, (iii) overall follow -up time  remained  
somewhat  limited  (median  follow -up  =  20.8  months),  which  may  have  
limited ability to see long -term toxicities, (iv) randomized  data on the  
use  of  FOLFIRINOX,  gemcitabine  with  nab-paclitaxel,  or  FOLFOX  in  the  
neoadjuvant setting  were not yet available.  Whereas  retrospective  
series  have  been  promising,  prospective  data  are  needed  to  fully  assess  
these  regimens.  
Krempi
en and Roeder (2017) noted that despite the important 
improvements made in the fields of surgery, chemotherapy and radiation 
therapy, pancreatic cancer remains one of the most lethal malignancies. 
Improved outcomes with novel chemotherapy regimens led again to 
increased attention on the role of localized radiotherapy, since local tumor 
progression causes significant morbidity and mortality in patients. Even 
after resection local failure rates are as high as 50 to 80 %. The 
immediate proximity to critical structures (bone marrow, spinal cord, kidneys, liver, and intestine) limits th e dose of radiation that can be 
administered to the tumor bed with conventional external beam radiation 
therapy (EBRT). The IORT appears to be an ideal therapeutic strategy for this disease, having the advantage of enabling the delivery of high doses of radiation to areas that are at risk for microscopic disease, saving 
critical organs and reducing the possibility of inducing radiotoxicity. This 
technique allows a theoretical increase in the radiation therapeutic index 
to tumor compared to the adjacent organs at risk (OAR). The authors 
updated and commented on IORT in the multi -disciplinary management 
of pancreatic cancer. They concluded that the available data       
 
       
         
          
         
     
   
          
   
     
       
            
            
 
            
    
        
        
      
      
        
         
   
       
      
         
      
       
         
          
     
            
               
          
          
        
    
      
    Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 35 of 66 
demonstrated that IORT is a safe addition to the treatment of pancreatic 
cancer and standard neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapies, with the intention 
of improving local control for patients with resectable pancreatic cancer. 
Series of patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer showed that most 
patients experienced pain relief and improved local control. In select 
studies, inclusion of IORT led to improved survival. Improved outcomes 
with novel chemotherapy regimens led again to increased attention on the 
role of localized radiotherapy, since local tumor progression causes signifi cant morbidity and mortality in patients. Intra- operative radiation 
therapy (IORT) techniques allow increasing the effective radiation dose 
and improving local tumor control. However, at present, no phase III data 
clearly defines the role of IORT in the management of pancreatic cancer. 
Jin and colleagues (2020) noted that several studies examining the role of 
IORT in the treatment of resectable PC have been published; however, 
their results remain inconsistent. By conducting a systematic review and meta -analysis, this study aimed to compare clinical outcomes in patients 
with resectable PC who underwent surgery with or without IORT. The 
Medline/PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Library data- bases were 
searched to identify relevant studies published up to February 28, 2019. The main outcome measures included median survival time (MST), local 
recurrence (LR), post -opera tive complications, and operation- related 
mortality. Pooled effect estimates were obtained by performing a 
random -effects meta -analysis. A total of 1,095 studies were screened for 
inclusion, of which 15 studies with 834 patients were included in the meta -analysis. Overall, 401 patients underwent pancreatic resection with 
IORT and 433 underwent surgery without IORT. The pooled analysis revealed that IORT group experienced favorable OS (median survival rate 
[MSR], 1.20; 95 % CI: 1.06 to 1.37, p = 0.005), compared with patients who did not receive IORT. Additionally, the pooled data showed a 
significantly reduced LR rate in the IORT group compared with that in the 
non-IORT group (relative risk [RR], 0.70; 95 % CI: 0.51 to 0.97, p = 0.03). 
The incidences of post -operative complications (RR, 0.95; 95 % CI: 0.73 
to 1.23) and operation- related mortality (RR, 1.07; 95 % CI: 0.44 to 2.63) 
were similar between the IORT and non- IORT groups. The authors 
concluded that IORT significantly improved loco- regional control and OS 
in patients with resectable PC, without increasing post -operative 
complications and operation- related mortality rates.       
 
 
 
 
        
            
         
      
           
        
       
    Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 36 of 66 
The authors stated that this meta- analysis  had several  drawbacks.  First,  
most  of the included trials  had small sample sizes.  Nevertheless,  
analysis  of  the  pooled  data  clearly  showed a  superior  effect  of  surgery  
combined  with  IORT  with  regards  to  MST  and  LR  when  compared  to  non- 
IORT  groups.  As  post-operative complications  and operation- related 
mortality  rates  were  similar  between  the  2  groups,  applying  IORT  did  not  
cause  additional  risks  or  side  effects  to the  patients.  Second,  there  was  
substantial  heterogeneity in the meta- analysis. In fact,  owing to potential  
confounders, such  as  population  characteristics,  year  of  publication,  the  
study sample sizes,  etc.,  these investigators conducted s  ubgroup and 
sensitivity  analyses  to  identify  the  source  of  heterogeneity  and  confirm  the 
stability of these findings. Risk estimates barely changed after  analyses  
with  fixed effects  models;  however,  substantial  heterogeneity  remained.  
When the analysis  only  included studies  from  selected  periods  when the  
publications  were  produced  (before  or  after  2000),  the  overall  polled  data  
showed  a  significant  difference  that  favored  combined  IORT  (MSR,  1.20,  
95 %  CI:  1.06 to  1.37;  p =  0.005),  especially  for  studies  conducted after  
2000  (MSR,  1.22,  95  %  CI:  1.07  to  1.40;  p  =  0.004),  which  appeared  to  be 
attributable to combination therapy.  Using s  ensitivity analysis, the  main  
source of  heterogeneity  was  identified  from  the  study  by  Shibamoto  et  al  
(1990)  wherein the  imbalance  of  sample  sizes  between  the IORT  and 
non-IORT  groups  was  significant  (n =  4 and 48,  respectively).  After  
excluding  this  single  study,  the  heterogeneity  reduced  from  moderate  (I2  
=  65.3  %;  p =  0.000)  to  low  level  (I2 = 30.6  %;  p  =  0.132),  and  the  pooled 
estimate  still  reached  statistical  significance  (MSR  =  1.17;  95  %  CI:  1.06 
to  1.28,  p =  0.002).  Third,  most  of  the included studies in the present  
meta -analysis  were  retrospective  analyses;  thus,  further  large  RCTs  are 
needed to  confirm  these  findings.  
Soft Tissue Sarcoma 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network’s clinical practice guideline on 
”Soft tissue sarcoma” (Version 2.2016) states that “The use of IORT has 
provided encouraging results in patients with retroperitoneal STS …. 
IORT with or without EBRT has been effective in terms of local control 
and survival in patients with primary and recurrent retroperitoneal STS …. 
An ongoing study (NCT01566123) is examining preoperative RT,followed 
by surgery with IORT in patients with high -risk retroperitoneal sarcoma. 
Preliminary results suggest promising local control and OS rates”.       
 
 
      
     
           
      
        
    
        
        
        
         
         
         
         
  
         
        
        
        
    
   
      
    
          
          
            
            
           
   
 
 
 
       
          
         
    
         
            Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 37 of 66 
Spinal Metastases 
Bludau and associates (2015) stated that as a consequence of more 
effective systemic therapy, the survival of patients suffering from malignant tumors has been significantly improved but a longer life span is 
often associated with a higher incidence of osseous metastases. The 
majority of these metastases are localized in the spine causing pain, 
instability and neurological impairments. The inter -disciplinary 
management of spinal metastases previously consisted of stabilization followed by fractionated EBRT. A reduction in procedural severity and 
morbidity as well as consideration of self -sufficiency and hospitalization 
time are important target parameters for these palliative patients. 
Kyphoplasty combined with IORT (Kypho-IORT) is one of several modern 
treatment options, which involves a minimally invasive procedure with local high -dose trans -pedicular irradiation of the spine with low-energy (50 
kV) X -rays. Immediately following irradiation, stabilization of the spine is 
carried out using kyphoplasty via the same access route so that a single stage procedure with excellent pain reduction and good local tumor control can be achieved. These researchers presented clinical data for this procedure and the different fields of indications were critically reviewed and compared to other therapeutic options. Methodological 
improvements and options for further individualization of therapy were 
demonstrated. The authors concluded that Kypho- IORT procedure is a 
safe, feasible and beneficial modern therapeutic option for instant stabilization and local tumor control in patients with spinal metastases. 
More than 100 operations have been successfully performed so that the 
method can be deemed suitable for inclu sion in the clinical routine. They 
noted that a phase II dose escalation study has now been completed and 
submitted for publication and a 2-arm non-inferiority trial (phase III study) 
for comparison with conventional irradiation is in progress . 
Breast Cancer 
Valente et al (2016) noted that single- dose IORT is an emerging 
treatment for women with early stage breast cancer. These researchers 
defined the frequency of IORT use, patient selection, and outcomes of 
patients treated in North America. A multi -institutional retrospective 
registry was created, and 19 institutions using low-kilovoltage IORT for 
the treatment of breast cancer entered data on patients treated at their       
 
          
       
     
        
     
      
        
         
         
       
        
           
       
    
     
          
         
          
         
          
   
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 38 of 66 
institution before July 31, 2013. Patient selection, IORT treatment details, 
complications, and recurrences were analyzed. From 2007 to July 31, 
2013, a total of 935 women were identified and treated with lumpectomy and IORT. A total of 822 patients had at least 6 months' follow -up 
documented and were included in the analysis. The number of IORT 
cases performed increased significantly over time (p < 0.001). The median patient age was 66.8 years. Most patients had disease that was less than 2 cm in size (90 %) and was estrogen- positive (91 %); most 
patients had invasive ductal cancer (68 %). Of those who had a sentinel lymph node procedure performed, 89 % had negative sentinel lymph 
nodes. The types of IORT performed were primary IORT in 79 %, 
secondary IORT in 7 %, or planned boost in 14 %. Complications were 
low. At a median follow -up of 23.3 months, crude in -breast recurrence 
was 2.3 % for all patients treated. The authors concluded that IORT use 
for the treatment of breast cancer is significantly increasing in North 
America, and physicians are selecting low-risk patients for this treatment 
option. Low complication and local recurrence rates support IORT as a 
treatment option for selected women with early stage breast cancer. The 
main drawback of this study were: it was a retrospective analysis (of a 
registry) of the results of a novel treatment; and follow -up was only mid- 
term (23.3 months). 
Harness  et  al  (
 2018)  conducted  a metaanalysis  to  assess  single -fraction  
electron IORT  during breast  conserving  surgery.  The study  identified  13 
publications.  The analysis  demonstrated  a  pooled  monthly  local  
recurrence  rate of  0.02%  per  person- month  (95%  confidence  interval  CI  
0.00–0.06%)  for the studies with a follow -up  period  shorter  than 5  years,  
0.03%  per  person- month  (95%  CI  0.02– 0.06%) for  studies  with  a  follow - 
up period of  5  years  or  longer,  and 0.02%  per  person- month  (95%  CI  
0.01–0.04%)  overall. A  key limitation  of this  metaanalysis  is that it was  
based primarily  on  poor  quality  evidence.  Only  one study  included in  the  
analysis  was  randomized,  with the remaining studies  either  single- arm 
prospective  analyses  or  observational,  single-institution  studies. This  
hindered the  ability  to  make  direct  comparisons  between  the recurrence  
rates  after  treatment  with  IORT  and the recurrence  rate  after  treatment  
with  alternative  radiation  options  because  the  study  populations  may  have  
been  different.  Additionally,  outcomes  beyond  5  years  were  not  available 
in  all  the  studies  due  to  limited  long-term  follow -up  data  to  date.        
 
           
         
         
        
    
    
           
              
          
           
      
         
    
     
        
           
       
          
      
 
      
           
     
 
    
   
       
     
      
          
 
       
      
        
         
       
           
           
        Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 39 of 66 
An UpToDate review on “Adjuvant radiation therapy for women with newly 
diagnosed, non- metastatic breast cancer” (De Los Santos, 2017) states 
that “Caution with intraoperative radiation therapy --Ongoing research is 
aimed at exploring other modalities of RT that will minimize toxicities 
without reducing effectiveness. An example of this is intraoperative 
radiation therapy (IORT), which condenses the entire therapeutic dose 
into a single fraction, permitting surgery and radiation to be completed in 
one day. At this time, however, we suggest that use of IORT be limited to 
a clinical trial because the available data suggest an association with a higher risk of in -breast tumor recurrences (IBTR). For patients in whom 
the duration of therapy required for standard WBRT is a concern, hypo- 
fractionated WBRT schedules are a viable option. Two trials, the 
TARGeted Intraoperative radiation Therapy -A (TARGIT -A) and the 
External versus intraoperative RT (ELIOT) trials, suggest that IORT is associated with an increased risk of IBTR compared with WBRT 
(absolute increase of approximately 4 % over 5 years). In women with high-risk breast cancers (e.g., grade 3, ER -negative, or triple- negative), 
the absolute increased risk was on the order of 15 to 20 %. Longer -term 
follow -up (at 10 to 15 years) is warranted”. 
Furthermore, National Comprehensive Cancer Network’sclinical practice 
guideline on “Breast cancer” (Version 2.2017) does not mention the use 
of IORT as a management tool. 
Liu and colleagues (2017) noted that APBI technology has theoretical advantages in comparison with traditional adjuvant radiation therapy (WBI) after BCS. However, published RCTs have shown inconsistent outcomes. Thus, these researchers carried out a comprehensive assessment of the safety and effectiveness of APBI technology is needed. Searches for relevant RCTs of APBI versus WBI were 
performed using the following sources: PubMed, Embase, Cochrane 
Library, Web of Science. Two independent observers evaluated the identified studies. The meta -analysi s was conducted using RevMan 5.2 
software. A total of 7 studies of 7,452 patients were included in this 
analysis. All 7 studies reported local recurrence as an outcome. Meta -
analysis of 5 trials that included 6,486 patients showed significantly 
different 5-year local recurrence rates for APBI and WBI groups (HR = 
4.54, 95 % CI: 1.78 to 11.61, p = 0.002). Further analysis showed that this difference may be related to the choice of treatment methods.       
 
      
           
           
            
      
          
           
        
         
   
 
        
   
    
          
        
       
        
          
      
        
      
          
          
          
         
    
         
            
          
         
     
       
          
    
          
      
         
          Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 40 of 66 
Benefit was conferred to the APBI group for the outcome of non- breast 
cancer deaths. There was no significant difference between the 2 groups 
in terms of nodal recurrence, systemic recurrence, OS, or mortality rates. 
Toxicity side effects and cosmetic effects were similar in both groups, but 
IORT appeared to have a greater acute response. The authors 
concluded that although the analysis showed that patients receiving APBI 
had a higher local recurrence rate, subgroup analyses suggested that this 
might be related to therapeutic options. They stated that patients who 
receive accurate radiotherapy may have greater benefits; APBI is a promising treatment technology. 
Vaidya and associates (2017) stated that the clinical effectiveness of 
targeted IORT (TARGIT -IORT) has been confirmed in the random ized 
TARGIT -A (targeted IORT -alone) trial to be similar to a several weeks' 
course of whole -breast EBRT in patients with early breast cancer. These 
researchers determined the cost-effectiveness of TARGIT -IORT toinform 
policy decisions about its wider implementation. TARGIT -A randomized 
clinical trial (ISRCTN34086741) which compared TARGIT with traditional 
EBRT and found similar breast cancer control, particularly when TARGIT 
was given simultaneously with lumpectomy. Cost -utility analysis using 
decision analytic modelling by a Markov model. A cost -effectiveness 
Markov model was developed using TreeAge Pro V.2015. The decision 
analytic model compared 2 strategies of radiotherapy for breast cancer in 
a hypothetical cohort of patients with early breast cancer based on the published health state transition probability data from the TARGIT -A trial. 
Analysis was performed for United Kingdom (UK) setting and National Health Service (NHS) healthcare payer's perspective using NHS cost 
data and treatment outcomes were simulated for both strategies for a 
time horizon of 10 years. Model health state utilities were drawn from the 
published literature. Future costs and effects were discounted at the rate 
of 3.5 %. To address uncertainty, 1- way and probabilistic sensitivity 
analyses were performed. Main outcome measure was quality -adjusted 
life-years (QALYs). In the base case analysis, TARGIT -IORT was a 
highly cost -effective strategy yielding health gain at a lower cost than its 
comparator EBRT. Discounted TARGIT -IORT and EBRT costs for the 
time horizon of 10 years were £12,455 and £13,280, respectively. 
TARGIT -IORT gained 0.18 incremental QALY as the discounted QALYs 
gained by TARGIT -IORT were 8.15 and by EBRT were 7.97 showing 
TARGIT -IORT as a dominant strategy over EBRT. Model outputs were       
 
      
          
     
 
       
           
           
      
         
         
            
             
          
           
          
          
          
        
          
   
            
              
             
      
 
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 41 of 66 
robust to 1- way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses. The authors 
concluded that the TARGIT -IORT is a dominant strategy over EBRT, 
being less costly and producing higher QALY gain. 
Takanen and co- workers (2017) reported their experience with full -dose 
21 Gy IORT in early breast cancer patients after BCS to define most 
important selection factors. A total of 758 patients, subjected to BCS and 
IORT, were retrospectively analyzed evaluating most important clinical 
outcomes. Median follow -up was 5.2 years. Results from Cox analyses 
defined 2 groups of patients, "suitable" (age greater than 50 years, non-lobular histology, tumor size less than or equal to 2 cm, pN0 or pNmic, ki67 les than or equal to 20 %, non-triple negative receptor status and G1 
to G2) and "unsuitable" for IORT, with a higher rate of breast related 
events moving from "suitable" to "unsuitable" group. The 5- year rate of 
ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence (IBTR) was 1.8 % in suitable group with significant differences versus unsuitable (1.8 versus 11.6 %, p < 0.005). Same differences between 2 groups were evidenced in true local 
relapse (0.6 versus 6.9 %, p < 0.005) and i n new ipsilateral BC (1.1 
versus 4.7 %, p < 0.015). The authors concluded that in their current 
practice they consider the following pre- operative factors to select 
patients suitable for IORT: age greater than 50 years, absence of lobular 
histology, tumor size less than or equal to 2 cm, pN0 or pNmic, according 
to APBI consensus statement, including also ki67 less than or equal to 20 
%, non- triple negative receptor status and G1- G2. 
In this  multi -cen
 ter  study,  Lai  and associates  (2017)  reported the  patient  
selection  criteria  for  and  preliminary  oncologic  outcomes  associated  with 
IORT  delivered by  the Xoft  Axxent  eBx  system  for  early -stage breast  
cancer  in  Taiwan.  Patients  with  early  breast  cancer  in  Taiwan received 
BCS and received  IORT with  Xoft  Axxent  eBx  System  during  2013 to 
2015 was  searched from  database of  Taiwan  IORT  study  cooperative  
group  (T-IORTSCG).  Patients’  clinicopathologic  characteristics  and  early  
post-operative  results  were  collected  and reported.  During the  study  
period,  26 hospitals  in  Taiwan performed  a total  of  261 Xoft  IORT  
procedures  for  breast  cancer.  The mean age of  them  was  52.9 ±  9.8  
years  (37  to  72),  and  tumor  size  was  1.5  ±  0.8  cm  (range  of  0.1  to  4.2  cm) 
for  invasive  cancer  and 1.2 ±  0.8 cm  (range  of  0.2  to 3.0 cm)  for d uctal  
carcinoma  in-situ  (DCIS)  lesions.  Lymph  node  metastasis  was  found  in  6 
(2.3  %)  patients.  The  patients  received  IORT  in  Taiwan  differed  markedly        
 
  
    
           
            
         
            
         
           
      
 
    
       
      
     
          
     
         
         
       
              
            
       
          
        
      
         
        
      
        
       
  
 
   
         Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 42 of 66 
from those used in the ELIOT and TARGIT -A studies. Specifically, 
patients selected for IORT in Taiwan tended to be younger, their tumors 
tended to be larger and the prevalence of lymph node metastasis tended 
to be lower. Among these 261 patients, 8 (3.1 %) patients required WBI. 
During a mean follow -up of 15.6 months, loco-regional recurrence was 
observed in 2 (0.8 %) patients. The authors concluded that in real world experience, patients received IORT differed quite significantly withcriteria 
formulated by trials. The preliminar y results of IORT in Taiwan showed it 
was well -acceptable by patients and clinicians. 
Correa and colleagues (2017) updated the APBI consensus statement 
published in 2009 and provided guidance on use of IORT for partial 
breast irradiation in early -stage breast cancer, based on published 
evidence complemented by expert opinion. These researchers carried 
out a systematic PubMed search using the same terms as the original consensus statement, which yielded 419 articles; 44 articles were 
selected. The authors synthesized the published evidence and, through a 
series of conference calls and e-mails , reached consensus regarding the 
recommendations. The new recommendations included lowering the age 
in the "suitability group" from 60 to 50 years and in the "cautionary group" 
to 40 years for patients who meet all other elements of suitability. 
Patients with low -risk ductal carcinoma in- situ (DCIS), as per Radiation 
Therapy Oncology Group 9804 criteria, were categorized in the "suitable" 
group. The task force agreed to maintain the current criteria based on 
margin status. Recommendat ions for the use of IORT for breast cancer 
patients included: counseling patients regarding the higher risk of IBRT 
with IORT compared with WBI; the need for prospective monitoring of 
long- term local control and toxicity with low -energy radiograph IORT 
given limited follow -up; and restriction of IORT to women with invasive 
cancer considered "suitable". This updated consensus statement provided the following recommendation: 
Patients interested in cancer control equivalent to that achieved  
with  WBI post -lumpectomy for breast conservation  should be  
counseled that in 2 clinical trials the  risk of IBTR was higher with  
IORT. (High  quality of evidence (HQE),  recommendation rated as  
“Strong”).  
Electron
 beam IORT should be restricted to women with invasive 
cancer considered “suitable” for partial breast irradiation based on       
 
           
   
 
        
  
   
 
          
      
             
     
       
        
            
      
          
          
      
     
           
              
              
              
         
            
              
        
             
        
          
  
 
  
        
          
    Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 43 of 66 
the  results  of  a  multi -variate  analysis  with  median  follow -up  of  5.8  
years. (Moderate quality of evidence (MQE), recommendation  
rated as  “Strong”).  
Low -energy x
-ray IORT for PBI should be used within the context of 
a prospective registry or clinical trial, per ASTRO Coverage with 
Evidence Development (CED) statement. When used, it should be restricted to women with invasive cancer considered “suitable” for 
partial breast irradiation based on the data at the time of this 
review. (MQE, recommendation rated as “Weak”). 
Sorrentino and colleagues (2018) stated that IORT could be not -inferior to 
EBRT in selected patients, but toxicities, self -perception of body image, 
quality of life, and resumption of work or daily activities have been poorly 
explored. These researchers compared these outcomes between EBRT, 
IORT full -dose (IORT -f) and IORT boost (IORT -b). A total of 443 
consecutive patients, candidates for BCS, were in cluded: EBRT was 
performed in 220 patients (49.7 %), IORT -f in 140 patients (31.6 %), and 
IORT -b in 83 patients (18.7 %). Radiotherapy -related toxicities were 
registered. Patients were evaluated at 6 months for Body Image after Breast Cancer Questionnaire (BIBCQ) to assess possible changes in self-
perception of body image and limitations. A 2nd questionnaire explored the impact of EBRT, IORT -f and IORT -b on resumption of work and 
normal daily activities. EBRT had a higher risk of breast fibrosis and retraction (OR 3.58, 95 % CI: 1.024 to 12.526, p = 0.046) and breast 
edema (OR 6, 95 % CI: 2.077 to 17.335, p = 0.001) compared to IORT -f, 
but a lower risk of seroma compared to IORT -b (OR 0.36, 95 % CI: 0.166 
to 0.785, p = 0.01). The BIBCQ scores showed a better outcome in arm 
concerns with IORT -f (-3.3) versus IORT -b (-1.3, p = 0.002) and EBRT 
(-1.7, p = 0.006), although biased by the lower rate in axillary dissections. 
Return to daily activities occurred after 70.6 days with EBRT versus 41 
days with IORT -f (p < 0.0001) and 53.3 days with IORT -b (p = 0.07), 
without any effect of age or axillary dissection. The authors concluded that IORT could reduce adverse effects, allowing faster resumption of job 
and house- works. 
Thangarajah and co- workers (2018) stated that mastectomy is the 
standard procedure in patients with inIBTR or breast cancer after irradiation of the chest due to Hodgkin's disease. In certain cas es, a 
second BCS in combination with IORT is possible. To- date, data       
 
    
           
          
          
        
      
      
     
      
         
          
        
         
            
      
     
           
    
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 44 of 66 
concerning BCS in combination with IORT in pre -irradiated patients are 
limited. This was the 1st pooled analysis of this special indication with a 
mature follow -up of 5 years. Patients with IBTR after EBRT (treated in 2 
centers) for breast cancer were included. Patients with previous EBRT including the breast tissue due to other diseases were also included. 
IORT was performed with the Intrabeam -device using low kV X- rays. 
Clinical data including outcome for all patients and toxicity for a 
representative cohort (LENT -SOMA scales) were obtained. Statistical 
analyses were done including Kaplan- Meier estimates for local 
recurrence, distant metastasis and OS. A total of 41 patients were 
identified (39 patients with IBTR, 2 with Hodgkin`s disease in previous 
medical history). Median follow -up was 58 months (range of 4 to 170). 
No grade 3/4 acute toxicity occurred within 9 weeks. Local recurrence-free survival rate was 89.9 % and OS was 82.7 % at 5 years; 7 patients developed metastasis within the whole follow -up. The authors concluded 
that BCS in combination with IORT in IBTR in pre-irradiated patients is a feasible method to avoid mastectomy with a low risk of side effects and an excellent local control and good OS. 
Barrou and  assoc
 iates  (2018)  stated  that  the spread of  systematic  
screening and  the emergence  of  oncoplastic  techniques  allow  more 
breast  conservative  treatment  associating lumpectomy  and  EBRT.  In 
order to further facilitate the patient's treatment,  IORT has  been 
developed.  The oncological  safety  of  this  technique  has  been studied,  
and  is  considered  acceptable.  Many  questions  remain  unsolved  in  regard 
of  the toxicity  of  this  procedure  as  well  as  the patient's  selection  criteria.  
In this study, these investigators  presented the first  results  and 
complications  rate  of  patients  treated by  IORT  in  a  single  French 
institution.  Between 2012 and 2015,  all  patients  with  breast  cancer  
treated  in a 1 -step  procedure  associating  lumpectomy  and IORT  were 
retrospectively included in a m  ono-centric cohort. Acute and l  ong-term 
toxicities  were  evaluated using  CTCAE v4.0  classification.  A total  of  280 
breast  cancers  were treated  using  IORT procedure.  Additional  EBRT 
was  requested for  45.7 %  patients.  The acute complications  rate was  
14.6  %,  with  5  surgical  revisions  needed  (1.78  %).  With  a  median  follow - 
up of  911 days,  the  long-term  grade- 3  toxicity rate  was 1.1  %.  The only  
risk  factor  for  local  fibrosis  was  EBRT  (OR  =  1.99;  IC95  [1.05  to  3.81],  p  = 
0.036);  3  patients  (1.07 %)  were  diagnosed with  local  recurrence.  The 
results  from  this  cohort  confirmed  the  low  complication  and  recurrence        
 
        
             
        
       
           
            
 
   
   
      
        
      
        
    
            
     
      
         
    
            
      
       
 
 
 
 
       
          
           
          
        
                  
          
          
          
        
            
           
         Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 45 of 66 
rate of IORT procedure. The authors concluded that a good selection of 
patients is needed in order to lower the EBRT rate and allow therapeutic 
de-escalation. The classification of tumors into IHC subsets appeared a 
good selection gate. They stated that IORT appeared to have a low 
toxicity rate with an acceptable local recurrence risk, and should therefore 
be considered as an option in the treatment of early breast cancer. 
An UpToDate review on “Radiation therapy techniques in cancer 
treatment” (Mitin, 2018) states that “Intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT) is the delivery of radiation at the time of surgery. Whereas the dose delivered by external beam radiation therapy ( EBRT) is limited by 
the tolerance of surrounding normal tissues, IORT allows exclusion of 
part or all of the dose-limiting sensitive structures by operative mobilization and/or direct shielding of these structures. A single -fraction 
treatment is used, and dose is limited by structures (nerves, fixed organs) 
that cannot be displaced. The decision to deliver IORT is often made 
intraoperatively, based upon clinical and frozen- section pathology 
evaluation. Areas at high risk of local recurrence (positive margins, incompletely resected tumors) can be visualized and targeted while the patient is under anesthesia. The use of IORT was initiated in the 1960s in Japan, and currently, a linear accelerator -based electron treatment 
approach is used in approximately 90 centers in at least 16 countries worldwide”. 
Head and Neck Cancers 
Cristalli and colleagues (2016) evaluated the safety, effectiveness and functional outcomes of IORT followed by IMRT in locally advanced stage 
tumors involving the middle ear. Data on 13 consecutive patients treated 
for malignant tumor of external auditory canal involving the middle ear were retrospectively reviewed. Median follow -up was 33 months (range 
of 6 to 133); 5 (38 %) patients were stage III and 8 (62 %) were Stage IV 
according to the University of Pittsburgh staging system. Lateral temporal 
bone resection (LTBR) was performed in all cases; LTBR was associated 
with parotidectomy in 5 (38 %) cases, and with neck dissection and parotidectomy in 6 (46 %) cases. No patients had gross residual tumor. 
Surgical treatment was followed by IORT (12 Gy) and IMRT (50 Gy). 
Adjuvant chemotherapy was used in 4 (30 %) cases. Pre-operative and 
post-operative audiometric tests were performed to assess hearing loss;       
 
         
      
      
          
        
            
           
      
         
       
         
           
         
             
  
 
    
         
         
             
           
          
        
        
          
         
     
       
       
            
           
           
   
    
        
          
        
    Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 46 of 66 
5-year local -control (LC), 5-year distant -metastasis (DM), 5-year disease­
free-survival (DFS) and 5- year OS were calculated with Kaplan- Meyer 
method. Significant changes in bone conduction were reported after 
treatment. Partial flap necrosis was the only early complication observed 
in 3 (23 %) cases, while meningeal fistula was seen in 1 (7.6 %) case as 
a late complication. The 5-year LC rate was 68 %; the 5-year DM rate 
was 90 %; the 5- year DFS rate was 61 %; and the 5 -year OS rate was 
69 %. The authors c oncluded that IORT followed by IMRT for the 
treatment of advanced external auditory canal and middle ear tumors appeared to be safe. No intra- operative death was reported; IORT may 
reduce the post -operative irradiation of remnant tissue obtaining the same 
full dose on the tumor bed. No complications of the residual external ear were observed; detriment of neurosensory hearing may be expected. 
They stated that future studies are needed to confirm the benefit of this 
procedure in the ear. 
Kyrgias and colleagues (2016) noted that multi -modality therapy 
constitutes the standard treatment of advanced and recurrent head and 
neck cancer. Since loco-regional recurrence comprises a major obstacle 
in attaining cure, the role of IORT as an add- on in improving survival and 
local control of the disease has been investigated. IORT allows delivery 
of a single tumoricidal dose of radiation to areas of potential residual microscopic disease while minimizing doses to normal tissues. 
Advantages of IORT include the conformal delivery of a large dose of 
radiation in an exposed and precisely defined tumor bed, minimizing the 
risk of a geographic miss creating the potential for subsequent dose reduction of EBRT. This strategy allows for shortening overall treatment 
time and dose escalation. These investigators summarized recent published work on the use of IORT as an adjuvant modality to treat 
common head and neck cancer in the primary or recurrent setting. They 
searched the Medline, Scopus, Ovid, Cochrane, Embase, and ISI Web of 
Science databases for articles published from 1980 up to March 2016. 
Based on relevant publications it appeared that including IORT in the 
multi -modal treatment may contribute to improved local control. However, 
the benefit in OS is unclear. The authors concluded that IORT appeared 
to be a safe, promising adjunct in the management of head and neck 
cancer and yet further well -organized clinical trials are needed to 
determine its role more precisely.       
 
  
     
          
          
          
         
 
 
 
   
         
   
   
       
        
        
       
        
         
     
       Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 47 of 66 
Gao and colleagues (2017) stated that the treatment effects IORT for 
gastric and esophageal cancer remain uncertain. In a meta -analysis, 
these researches examined if IORT was associated with more favorable 
oncologic outcomes when compared to non-IORT for patients who have 
gastric or esophageal cancer. PubMed, Embase, and the references of 
relevant studies were systematically searched up to March 2016. 
Outcomes  were  ana lyzed with  fixed- effect  or  random -effect  models,  and 
the meta- analysis  was  completed with  odds  ratio  (OR),  HR,  and 95 %  CI  
as  effect  values.  A total  of  11  studies  were  included,  9  for  gastric  cancer 
and 2  for  esophageal  cancer.  The studies  included 1,581 patients,  570 in  
the IORT  group and 1,011 in  the control  group.  There was  no  significant  
difference  in  OS between  the IORT  group and control  group (HR  =  0.91,  
95 %  CI:  0.73 to  1.13;  p  =  0.38).  Two s ubgroups  based on cancer type  
also had  the similar  results  (gastric  group:  HR  =  0.98,  95  %  CI:  0.78  to  
1.24,  p  =  0.87;  esophagus  group:  HR  =  0.63,  95  %  CI:  0.37 to  1.05,  p =  
0.08). Besides, IORT  showed favorable effects for  patients  with c ancer in  
stage  II  and  stage III  and had the  advantage of  loco- regional  control.  
Regarding the c  omplications, the oc  currence rate had  no significant  
difference  between  the  IORT  group  and  control  group  (OR  =  1.15;  95  % 
CI:  0.77  to  1.72;  p  =  0.50).  The  authors  concluded  that  according  to  this  
meta -analysis,  IORT  did not  extend the  OS  in  gastric  cancer  and 
esophageal  cancer  patients,  but  had  a  favorable  effect  for  specific  stage 
patients to show loco- regional  control,  and  did not  increase  the risk  of  
complications.  
Sporadic Renal Angiomyolipoma 
Fernandez -Pello and colleagues (2020) noted that little is known 
regarding the natural history of sporadic angiomyolipoma (AML); there is 
uncertainty regarding the indications of treatment and therapeutic 
options. These researchers evaluated the indications, effectiveness, 
harms, and follow -up of different management modalities for sporadic 
AML to provide guidance for clinical practice. They carried out a 
systematic review of the literature, incorporating Medli ne, Embase, and 
the Cochrane Library (from January 1, 1990 to June 30, 2017), in accordance with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta -Analyses guidelines. No restriction on study design was imposed. 
Patients with sporadic AML were included. The main interventions 
included active surveillance, surgery (nephron- sparing surgery and       
 
      
     
       
      
          
       
   
       
       
      
     
          
            
             
  
      
        
       
     
       
         
     
    
          
    
 
 
 
         
          
          
     
           
   
      
       
        
        
         Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 48 of 66 
radical nephrectomy), selective arterial embolization, and percutaneous 
or laparoscopic thermal abla tions (radiofrequency, microwaves, or 
cryoablation). The outcomes included indications for active treatment, 
AML growth rate, AML recurrence rate, risk of bleeding, post -treatment 
renal function, adverse events (AEs) of treatments, and modalities of 
follow -up. Risk of bias assessment was performed using standard 
Cochrane methods. Among 2,704 articles identified, 43 were eligible for 
inclusion (0 RCTs, 9 non-randomized comparative retrospective studies, 
and 34 single -arm case series). Most studies were retrospective and 
uncontrolled, and had a moderate- to-high risk of bias. The authors 
concluded that in active surveillance series, spontaneous bleeding was reported in 2 % of patients and active treatment was undertaken in 5 %. Active surveillance was the most chosen option in 48 % of the cases, followed by surgery in 31 % and selective arterial embolization in 17 % of 
the cases. Selective arterial embolization appeared to reduce AML 
volume but required secondary treatment in 30 % of the cases. Surgery 
(particularly nephron- sparing surgery) was the most effective treatment in 
terms of recurrence and need for secondary procedures. Thermal ablation was an infrequent option. The association between AML size 
and the risk of bleeding remained unclear; as such the traditional 4-cm 
cut-off should not per se trigger active treatment. These researchers 
stated that in spite of the limitations and uncertainties relating to the evidence base, the findings may be used to guide and inform clinical practice, until more robust data emerge. This review does not mention IORT as a therapeutic option. 
Thymoma 
Cui and colleagues (2020) noted that IORT has been used to treat 
different residual solid tumors after tumor removal and has shown many 
advantages over other treatment methods. However, the use of IORT for 
invasive thymoma has not been reported. These researchers examined the safety and efficacy of INTRABEAM IORT for the treatment of invasive 
thymoma. Among the patients admitted to the authors’ hospital from 
September to December 2016 who were diagnosed with invasive 
thymoma, 14 were selected as study subjects. With medical histories taken beforehand, 8 of these patients were diagnosed with Masaoka stage IIA and 6 with Masaoka stage IIB; furthermore, 5 of the patients 
were diagnosed with myasthenia gravis (MG). INTRABEAM radiation (8       
 
           
        
       
      
    
         
   
   
             
       
        
       
        
   
      
             
            
       
      
          
         
    
   
    
      
 
 
      
          
     
          
    
  
 
      
         
         
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 49 of 66 
to 10 Gy, low energy) was delivered to the post -operative tumor bed of 
each patient during surgery. The intra- and post -operative complications 
were observed and evaluated, and the improvement in symptoms was 
assessed. An additional 23 patients with stage II thymoma undergoing radical surgery from April to August 2016 were chosen as the contro l 
group. One month after the operation, only 1 patient in the IORT group had cough, increased levels of leucocytes and neutrophils, and pulmonary inflammation on chest computed tomography. Reactive inflammation and pleural effusion in the 2 groups were similar (p > 0.05). 
There was no significant difference between the 2 groups in the 
improvement of MG (p > .05). Post -operative chest computed 
tomography and routine blood examination at 3 and 12 months showed 
that all the patients recovered, with normal hemogram levels and no pulmonary fibrosis around the radiation field. In addition, ultrasonic cardiography and electrocardiography demonstrated no significant 
difference before or after surgery within the IORT group. At the end of the 
follow -up, all the patients were alive, no relapse or remote metastasis was 
observed in the IORT group, and 2 in- patients in the control group had 
experienced relapse at 24 and 26 months. There was a significant 
difference in DFS between the 2 groups (p = 0.00). It is safe t o 
administer low-energy INTRABEAM IORT at a dose of approximately 10 
Gy in patients with stage II invasive thymoma. The authors concluded that INTRABEAM IORT did not significantly increase operation- or 
radiation -related complications and had no significant effect on vital 
organs such as the lungs and heart; its long- term efficacy is worth 
expecting. 
The authors stated that the objective of this study was to examine the safety and primary efficacy; therefore, these researchers did not have a 
large sample size in this study. Due to the limited sample size and the non-RCT design of the study, these investigators plan to design a 
prospective trial to confirm the effectiveness of INTRABEAM IORT in 
treating invasive thymoma in the near future. 
Furthermore, National Comprehensive Cancer Network’sclinical practice 
guideline on “Thymomas and thymic carcinomas” (Version 1.2020) does 
not mention intraoperative radiation therapy as a management / therapeutic option.       
 
 
 
 
 
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 50 of 66 
Appendix 
Breast Cancer Staging 
Stage 0  (also known as ductus carcinoma in -situ (DCIS)). Cancer is  
conﬁned  to  the  lobules  or d ucts  in t he  breast.  It  has  
not metastasized to surrounding tissue. Stage 0 cancer is called  
non-invasive. Some stage  0 cancers become inva sive later.  
Stage I. The tumor is small (or may  be too small to see) and  
invasive. It may or may not have metastasized to the lymph nodes  
close to the breast.  
Stage II. There may be no  tumor found in the breast, but cancer  
can be found that has  metastasized to axillary lymph nodes or  
nodes close to the breastbone. There might also  be a tumor  
between 2 and 5 cm in the breast with small cancers in some of  
the lymph nodes. Or, the tumor could be larger than 5 cm with no  
cancer in the nodes.  
Stage  IIIA. Cancer has metastasized to 4 to 9 axillary nodes or to  
nodes near the  breastbone but not to other  parts of the body. Or,  
there could be a tumor larger than 5 cm and cancer  that has  
metastasized to 3 axillary nodes or to nodes near the breastbone.  
Stage II
IB. The tumor has metastasized to the chest wall or to the  
skin of the breast causing an ulcer or swelling. It may also  
have  metastasized  to  axillary  nodes  but  not  to  other  parts  of  the 
body.  
Stage IIIC. Cancer of any size has metastasized to at least 10  
axillary nodes. It may also have metastasized to the skin of the  
breast or  breast wall, but not too  distant  parts of the body.  
Stage IV. The cancer is metastatic (i.e., it has spread  to other  
organs such as the bones, lungs, brain, or liver).  
Adapted  from  Gersten  T. Breast  cancer  staging.  MedlinePlus.  Last 
updated:  October  21,  2017.  Breast Cancer Sta ging  
(https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000911.htm)        
 
 
  
  
      
  
      
  
     
   
         
   
      
        
      
  
  
    
 
  
  
  
  
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 51 of 66 
Code Code Description 
CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met : 
77424 Intraoperativeradiationtreatment delivery, x-ray,single 
treatment session 
 
77425 Intraoperative radiation treatmentdelivery, electrons, 
 
single treatment session 
 
77469 Intraoperative radiation treatment management 
Other CPT codes related to the CPB : 
19294 Preparation of tumor cavity, with placement of a 
 
radiation therapy applicator for intraoperative radiation 
 
therapy (IORT) concurrent with partial mastectomy (List 
separately in addition to code for primary procedure) 
 
19301 Mastectomy, partial (e.g.,lumpectomy, tylectomy, 
 
quadrantectomy, segmentectomy) 
 
19302 Mastectomy, partial ( e.g., lumpectomy, tylectomy, 
 
quadrantectomy, segmentectomy); with axillary 
 
lymphadenectomy 
 
77261 - 
77299  Clinical treatment planning 
77300 - 
77399  Medical  radiation  physics,  dosimetry,  treatment  devices,  
and special  services  
77401 - 
77417  Radiation treatment delivery 
77427 - 
77499  Radiation treatment management 
77750 - 
77799  Clinical brachytherapy 
ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met :       
 
  
   
 
    
        
   
      
    
  
     Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 52 of 66 
Code Code Description 
C18.0 - 
C21.8  Malignant  neoplasm  of  colon,  rectosigmoid junction,  
rectum,  anus  and  anal  canal  
C46.1 Kaposi's sarcoma of soft tissue 
C49.0 Malignant  neoplasm  of  connective  and  soft  tissue  of  
head, face and   neck  
C49.4 - 
C49.5  Malignant  neoplasm  of  connective  and  soft  tissue  of  
abdomen  and  of  pelvis  [retroperitoneal  sarcoma]  
C50.011 - 
C50.929  Malignant neoplasm of breast 
C53.0 - 
C54.9  Malignant neoplasm of cervix uteri and of corpus uteri 
D05.00 - 
D05.92  Carcinoma in situ of breast 
ICD-10 codes not  covered for indications listed in the CPB  (not  
all-inclusive) :  
C00.0 - 
C15.9  Malignant  neoplasm  of  lip,  oral  cavity,  pharynx  and 
esophagus  [head and neck  cancer]  
C16.0 - 
C16.9  Malignant neoplasm of stomach [gastric cancer] 
C22.0 - 
C22.8  Malignant  neoplasm  of  liver  and  intrahepatic  bile  ducts 
[cholangiocarcinoma]  
C25.0 - 
C25.9  Malignant neoplasm of pancreas 
C30.0 -C33 Malignant  neoplasm  of  nasal  cavity  and middle  ear,  
accessory  sinuses,  larynx  and  trachea  [head  and  neck  
cancer]  
C37 Malignant neoplasm of thymus 
C40.00 - 
C41.9  Malignant  neoplasm  of  bone  and  articular  cartilage  
[osteosarcoma]        
 
 
         
        
     
       
         
 
       
          
       
          
      
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 53 of 66 
Code  Code Description 
C49.0 Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue of 
head, face and neck [head and neck cancer] 
C61 Malignant neoplasm of prostate 
C64.1 - 
C64.9  Malignant neoplasm of kidney, except renal pelvis 
C69.00 - 
C71.9  Malignant  neoplasm  of  eye  and  adnexa,  meninges  and  
brain  [head and neck  cancer  and brain  tumors]  
[conjunctival  neoplasms  (e.g., lymphoma,  sebaceous  
carcinoma,  and  squamous  cell  carcinoma)  and 
glioblastomas]  
C72.20 - 
C72.59  Malignant  neoplasm  of  cranial  nerves  [head  and  neck  
cancer  and  brain  tumors]  
C73 Malignant neoplasm of thyroid gland [head and neck 
cancer] 
C75.0 - 
C75.4  Malignant  neoplasm  of  other  endocrine  glands  [head 
and neck  cancer]  
C76.0 Malignant neoplasm of head, face and neck 
C79.31,  
C79.49 ­ 
C79.52  Secondary  malignant  neoplasm  of  brain,  other  parts  of  
nervous  system,  bone and bone marrow  [vertebral  
metastases]  
D02.3 Carcinoma in situ of other parts of respiratory system 
Carcinoma in situ of accessory sinuses; Carcinoma in 
situ of middle ear; Carcinoma in situ of nasal cavities 
[middle ear tumors or head and neck cancers] 
D17.71 Benign lipomatous neoplasm of kidney [sporadic renal 
angiomyolipoma] 
The above policy is based on the following references: 
1. Agencia de Evaluacion de Tecnologias Sanitarias (AETS). 
Intraoperative radiation therapy [summary]. IPE-99/22 (Public 
report). Madrid, Spain: AETS; 1999.       
  
    
       
 
   
         
  
           
        
 
 
             
     
           
        
 
          
 
 
  
    
 
 
    
 
   
  
  
   
 
        
            
 
   
        
  
  
 
          
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 54 of 66 
2. Alvarado MD, Conolly J, Park C, et al. Patient preferences 
 
regarding intraoperative versus external beam radiotherapy 
 
following breast- conserving surgery. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 
 
2014;143(1):135 -140. 
 
3. Ballo MT, Zagars GK, Pollock RE, Retroperitoneal soft tissue 
 
sarcoma: An analysis of radiation and surgical treatment. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;67(1):158 -163. 
 
4. Barrou J, Tallet A, Cohen M, et al. Contribution of intraoperative 
radiotherapy (IORT) for therapeutic de-escalation in early breast 
 
cancer: Report of a single institution's experience. Breast J. 
 
2018;24(5):715 -723. 
 
5. Bellon JR, Haﬀty BG, Harris EE, et al, Expert Panel on Radiation 
 
Oncology --Breast. ACR Appropriateness Criteria conservative 
 
surgery and radiation --stage I and II breast carcinoma [online 
 
publication]. Reston, VA: American College of Radiology (ACR); 
 
2011. 
 
6. Bergenfeldt M, Albertsson M. Current state of adjuvant therapy in 
resected pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Acta Oncol. 
2006;45(2):124 -135. 
 
7. Blohmer JU, Kimmig R, Kummel S, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy 
of breast cancer. Gynakol Geburtshilﬂiche Rundsch. 2008;48(2):63 ­
67. 
8. Bludau F, Reis T, Schneider F, et al. Kyphoplasty combined with 
intraoperative radiotherapy (Kypho -IORT). Alternative therapy for
 
patients with oligometastatic spinal metastases. Radiologe. 
2015;55(10):859 -867. 
 
9. Brenner T, Duggal S, Natale J, Wirth SM. Treatment protocols for 
breast cancer. UpToDate [online serial]. Wal tham, MA: UpToDate; 
reviewed June 2014. 
10. Bussieres E, Gilly FN, Rouanet P, et al. Recurrences of rectal 
cancers: Results of a multimodal approach with intraoperative 
radiation therapy. French Group of IORT. Intraoperative Radiation 
Therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1996;34(1):49 -56. 
11. Cai S, Hong TS, Goldberg SI, et al. Updated long -term outcomes 
and prognostic factors for patients with unresectable locally 
advanced pancreatic cancer treated with intraoperative 
radiotherapy at the Massachusetts General Hospital, 1978 to 2010. 
Cancer. 2013;119(23):4196 -4204. 
12. Call JA, Staﬀord SL, Petersen IA, Haddock MG. Use of 
intraoperative radiotherapy for upper -extremity soft -tissue 
sarcomas: Analysis of disease outcomes and toxicity. Am J Clin 
Oncol. 2014;37(1):81 -85.       
        
 
   
       
 
  
 
        
  
 
            
 
  
 
 
           
 
   
         
   
  
              
     
  
           
 
       
   
 
  
      
  
          
       
           
 
      
  
        
     Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 55 of 66 
13. Calvo FA, Meirino RM, Orecchia R. Intraoperative radiation 
therapy part 2. Clinical results. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 
2006;59(2):116- 127. 
14. Calvo FA, Santos M, Azinovic I. Intraoperative radiotherapy. Literature updating with an overview of results presented at the 6th 
International Symposium of Intraoperative Radiation Therapy. 
Rays. 1998;23(3):439- 461. 
15. Coelho TM, Fogaroli RC, Pellizzon ACA, et al. Intraoperative 
radiation therapy for the treatment of recurrent retroperitoneal 
and pelvic tumors: A single -institution analysis. Radiat Oncol. 
2018;13(1):224. 
16. Correa C, Harris EE, Leonardi MC, et al. Accelerated partial breast 
irradiation: Executive summary for the update of an ASTRO 
evidence- based consensus statement. Pract Radiat Oncol. 
2017;7(2):73- 79. 
17. Cox, JD. Clinical Applications of New Modalities. In: Moss; Radiation Oncology. 7th ed. JD Cox, ed. St Louis, MO: Mosby; 
1994:974- 976. 
18. Cristalli G, Mercante G, Marucci L, et al. Intra operative radiation 
therapy as adjuvant treatment in locally advanced stage tumors 
involving the middle ear: A hypothesis -generating retrospective 
study. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital. 2016;36(2):85- 90. 
19. Cui TX, Dai JG, Li JM, et al. Safety and eﬃcacy of INTRABEAM 
intraoperative radiotherapy for invasive thymoma. Medicine 
(Baltimore). 2020;99(27):e20964. 
20. Cuncins -Hearn A, Saunders C, Walsh D, et al. A systematic review of 
intraoperative radiotherapy in early stage breast cancer. ASERNIP ­
S Report No. 27. North Adelaide, SA: Australian Safety and Eﬃcacy Register of New Interventional Procedures – Surgical (ASERNIP -S); 
2002:1- 80. 
21. Czito BG, Anscher MS, Willett CG. Radiation therapy in the 
treatment ofcholangiocarcinoma. Oncology (Williston Park). 
2006;20(8):873- 884; discussion 886- 8888, 893- 895. 
22. De Los Santos JF. Adjuvant radiation therapy for women with 
newly diagnosed, non- metastatic breast cancer. UpToDate 
[online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed May 2017. 
23. del Carmen MG, Eisner B, Willet CG, et al. Intraoperative radiation 
therapy in the management of gynecologic and genitourinary 
malignancies. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2003;12(4):1031- 1042. 
24. del Carmen MG, McIntyre JF, Goodman A. The role of 
intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT) in the treatment of locally 
advanced gynecologic malignancies. Oncologist. 2000;5(1):18- 25.       
 
 
        
 
   
 
 
 
          
  
  
          
 
  
         
 
  
           
 
  
          
 
  
 
         
  
          
      
       
      
      
  
 
  
 
          
 
  
      
          Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 56 of 66 
25. Delaney TF, Harmon DC, Gebhardt MC. Local treatment for 
primary soft tissue sarcoma of the extremities and chest wall. 
UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed July 
2013. 
26. Dowdy SC, Mariani A, Cliby WA, et al. Radical pelvic resection and 
intraoperative radiation therapy for recurrent endometrial cancer: 
Technique and analysis of outcomes. Gynecol Oncol. 
2006;101(2):280 -286. 
27. Drognitz O, Henne K, Weissenberger C, et al. Long -term results 
after intraoperative radiation therapy for gastric cancer. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;70(3):715 -721. 
28. Eble MJ, Lehnert T, Herfarth C, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy as 
adjuvant treatment for sta ge II/III rectal carcinoma. Recent 
Results Cancer Res. 1998;146:152 -160. 
29. Eble MJ, Lehnert T, Treiber M, et al. Moderate dose intraoperative 
and external beam radiotherapy for locally recurrent rectal 
carcinoma. Radiother Oncol. 1998;49(2):169 -174. 
30. Engel D, Schnitzer A, Brade J, et al. Are mammographic changes in 
the tumor bed more pronounced after intraoperative 
radiotherapy for breast cancer? Subgroup analysis from a 
randomized trial (TARGIT -A). 2013;19(1):92 -95. 
31. Esposito E, Anninga B, Harris S, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy in 
early breast cancer. Br J Surg.2015;102(6):599 -610. 
32. Esposito E, Compagna R, Rinaldo M, et al. Intraoperative 
radiotherapy in elderly patients with breast cancer: Is there a 
clinical applicability? Review of the current evidence. Int J Surg. 
2016;33 Suppl 1:S88 -S91. 
33. Fernandez- Pello S, Hora M, Kuusk T, et al. Management of 
sporadic renal angiomyolipomas: A systematic review of 
available evidence to guide recommendations from the 
European Association of Urology Renal Cell Carcinoma 
Guidelines Panel. Eur Urol Oncol. 2020;3(1):57 -72.
 
34. Gao P, Tsai C, Yang Y, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy in gastric 
and esophageal cancer: Meta -analysis of long -term outcomes and 
complications. Miner va Med. 2017;108(1):74 -83. 
35. Garton GR, Gunderson LL, Webb MJ, et al. Intraoperative 
radiation therapy in gynecologic cancer: Update of the 
experience at a single institution. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
1997;37(4):839 -843. 
36. Gemignani ML, Alektiar KM, Leitao M, et al. Radical surgical 
resection and high -dose intraoperative radiation therapy (HDR ­
IORT) in patients with recurrent gynecologic cancers. Int J Radiat       
 
  
     
        
   
        
      
  
          
      
   
 
           
  
  
    
         
  
             
  
  
 
        
         
          
        
  
  
     
  
  
       
  
   
     
         
 
 
           
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 57 of 66 
Oncol Biol Phys. 2001;50(3):687 -694. 
37. Giordano FA, Brehmer S, Abo -Madyan Y, et al. INTRAGO: 
Intraoperative radiotherapy in glioblastoma multiforme --a 
phase I/II dose escalation study. BMC Cancer. 2014;14:992. 
 
38. Glujovsky D. Intraoperative radiation therapy in pelvic gynecologic 
 
malignancies [summary]. Technical Information Brief No. 24.Buenos 
 
Aires, Argentina: Institute for Clinical Eﬀectiveness and Health 
Policy (IECS); September 2004. 
39. Gunderson LL, Nelson H, Martenson JA, et al. Locally advanced 
primary colorectal cancer:Intraoperative electron and external 
 
beam irradiation +/ - 5-FU. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
 
1997;37(3):601 -614. 
 
40. Habl G, Uhl M, Hensley F, et al. Intraoperative electron radiation 
 
therapy (IOERT) in patients with locally recurrent renal cell 
 
carcinoma. Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:282. 
 
41. Hahnloser D, Haddock MG, Nelson H. Intraoperative radiotherapy 
 
in the multimodality approach to colorectal cancer. Surg Oncol Clin
 
N Am. 2003;12(4):993 -1013. 
 
42. Harness JK, Davies K, Via C, et al. Meta- analysis of local invasive 
 
breast cancer recurrence after electron int raoperative 
radiotherapy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2018;25(1):137 -147. 
 
43. Hashiguchi Y, Sekine T, Kato S, et al. Indicators for surgical 
 
resection and intraoperative radiation therapy for pelvic 
 
recurrence of colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum. 2003;46(1):31 -39.
 
44. Hellman S. Principles of Cancer Management: Radiation Therapy. In: 
Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. 6th ed. VT DeVita 
 
Jr, S Hellman, SA Rosenberg, eds. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2001:285 -286. 
 
45. Hershko D, Abdah -Bortnyak R, Nevelsky A, et al. Breast -
conserving surgery and intraoperative electron radiotherapy in 
early breast cancer: Experience at the Rambam Health Care 
Campus. Isr Med Assoc J. 2012;14(9):550 -554. 
 
46. Jin L, Shi N, Ruan S , et al. The role of intraoperative radiation 
 
therapy in resectable pancreatic cancer: A systematic review and
 
meta- analysis. Radiat Oncol. 2020;15(1):76. 
 
47. Kalapurakal JA, Goldman S, Stellpﬂug W, et al. Phase I study of 
	
intraoperative radiotherapy with photon radiosurgery system in 
children with recurrent brain tumors: Preliminary report of ﬁrst
 
dose level (10 Gy). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006;65(3):800 ­
808. 
48. Keane FK, Wo JY, Ferrone CR, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy in the
 
era of intensive neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
       
 
 
       
    
  
       
        
          
   
  
 
         
          
  
         
 
    
 
 
      
  
          
   
     
              
  
  
  
      
 
  
            
      
 
 
  
 
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 58 of 66 
chemoradiotherapy for pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Am J Clin 
 
Oncol. 2018;41(6):607 -612
 
49. Krempien R, Roeder F. Intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT) in 
pancreatic cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2017;12: 8.
 
50. Kriegmair MC, Bertolo R, Karakiewicz PI, et al; Young Academic 
 
Urologists Kidney Cancer working group of the European 
Association of Urology. Systematic review of the management of 
local kidney cancer relapse. Eur Urol Oncol. 2018;1(6):512 -523. 
 
51. Kyrgias G, Hajiioannou J, Tolia M, et al. Intraoperative radiation 
 
therapy (IORT) in head and neck cancer: A systematic review. 
 
Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95(50):e5035. 
 
52. Lai H -W, Liu L -C, Ouyang F, et al. Multi -center study on patient 
selection for and the oncologic safety of intraoperative 
radiotherapy (IORT) with the Xoft Axxent® eBx® System for the 
management of early stage breast cancer in Taiwan. PLoS One. 
 
2017; 12(11): e0185876. 
 
53. Lemanski C, Azria D, Gourgon -Bourgade S, et al. Intraoperative 
radiotherapy in early -stage breast cancer: Results of the 
montpellier phase II trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2010;76(3):698 -703. 
 
54. Leonardi MC, Ivaldi GB, Santoro L, et al. Long -term side eﬀects and
 
cosmetic outcome in a pool of bre ast cancer patients treated 
 
with intraoperative radiotherapy with electrons as sole
 
treatment. Tumori. 2012;98(3):324 -330. 
 
55. Letter from D. Jeﬀrey Demanes, M.D., Chair, American Society for
 
Therapeutic Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) Regulatory Subcommittee 
and John W. Rieke, M.D., Chair, ASTRO Managed Care Workgroup 
 
to Aetna regarding IORT, December 9, 2005. 
 
56. Liu G, Dong Z, Huang B, et al. Eﬃcacy and safety of accelerated 
 
partial breast irradiation: A meta -analysis of published 
 
randomized studies. Oncotarget.2017;8(35):59581 -59591. 
 
57. Lowy AM, Rich TA, Skibber JM, et al. Preoperative infusional 
 
chemoradiation, selectiveintraoperative radiation, andresection for
 
locally advanced pelvic recurrence of colorectal adenocarcinoma. 
 
Ann Surg. 1996;223(2):177 -185. 
 
58. Maluta S, Dall'Oglio S, Marciai N, et al. Accelerated partial breast 
 
irradiation using only intraoperative electron radiation therapy in 
early stage breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
 
2012;84(2):e145 -e152. 
 
59. Marchioro G, Volpe A, Tarabuzzi R, et al. Radical prostatectomy and 
 
intraoperative radiation therapy in high -risk prostate cancer. Adv 
Urol. 2012;2012:687230. 
       
   
 
      
  
           
  
 
   
       
  
        
  
         
   
        
         
  
   
       
    
  
  
        
  
        
     
  
        
 
  
 
       
  
   
 
  
       
  
 
        Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 59 of 66 
60. Marr BP, Abramson DH, Cohen GN, et al. Intraoperative high -dose 
rate of radioactive phosphorus 32 brachytherapy for diﬀuse 
recalcitrant conjunctival neoplasms: A retrospective case series and report of toxicity. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015;133(3):283- 289. 
61. Marucci L, Pichi B, Iaccarino G, et al. Intraoperative radiation therapy as an "early boost" in locally advanced head and neck 
cancer: Preliminary results of a feasibility study. Head Neck. 
2008;30(6):701- 708. 
62. Mitin T. Radiation therapy techniques in cancer treatment. 
UpToDate [online serial]., Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed 
May 2018. 
63. Mitsumori M, Hiraoka M. Current status of accelerated partial 
breast irradiation. Breast Cancer. 2008;15(1):101- 107. 
64. Mundy L, Merlin T. Intra -operative radiation therapy: Applied to 
women undergoing breast cancer surgery aimed at reducing 
tumour recurrence. Horizon Scanning Prioritising Summary ­
Volume 2. Adelaide, SA: Adelaide Health Technology Assessment 
(AHTA) on behalf of National Horizon Scanning Unit (HealthPACT 
and MSAC); 2003. 
65. Nakfoor BM, Willett CG, Shellito PC, et al. The impact of 5­ﬂuorouracil and intraoperative electron beam radiation therapy on 
the outcome of patients with locally advanced primary rectal and 
rectosigmoid cancer. Ann Surg. 1998;228(2):194- 200. 
66. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Cervical 
cancer. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Version 
1.2005. Jenkintown, PA: NCCN; 2005. 
67. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Colon cancer. 
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Version 2.2006. 
Jenkintown, PA: NCCN; 2006. 
68. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Rectal cancer. 
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Version 2.2006. Jenkintown, PA: NCCN; 2006. 
69. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Uterine cancers. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Version 
1.2005. Jenkintown, PA: NCCN; 2005. 
70. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Breast cancer. 
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, version 3.2013. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2013.. 
71. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Breast cancer. 
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, version 
3.2014. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2013. 
72. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Breast cancer.       
 
 
       
  
 
  
       
  
 
        
   
 
        
  
       
        
 
    
       
   
        
 
          
 
      
  
  
 
  
         
  
         
 
  
   
         
  
  
   
      
  
          Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 60 of 66 
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, version 
 
2.2017. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2017. 
 
73. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Kidney cancer. 
 
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, version 
 
3.2014. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2014. 
 
74. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Pancreatic 
 
adenocarcinoma. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, 
 
version 1.2016. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2016. 
 
75. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Soft tissue 
sarcoma. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, version 
 
1.2013. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2013. 
 
76. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Soft tissue 
sarcoma. NCCN Clincial Practice Guidelines in Oncology, version 
 
2.2016. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2016. 
 
77. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Thymomas 
 
and thymic carcinomas. NCCN Clincial Practice Guidelines in 
 
Oncology, version 1.2020. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2020. 
78. Niewald M, Fleckenstein J, Licht N, et al. Intraoperative 
 
radiotherapy (IORT) combined with external beam radiotherapy 
 
(EBRT) for soft-tissue sarcomas - -a retrospective evaluation of 
 
the Homburg experience in the years 1995 -2007. Radiat Oncol. 
2009;4:32. 
 
79. Orecchia R, Luini A, Veronesi P, et al. Electron intraoperative 
treatment in patients with early -stage breast cancer: Data 
 
update. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2006;6(4):605 -611. 
 
80. Pacelli F, Di Giorgio A, Papa V, et al. Preoperative radiotherapy 
 
combined with intraoperative radiotherapy improve results of
 
total mesorectal excision in patients with T3 rectal cancer. Dis 
 
Colon Rectum. 2004;47(2):170 -179. 
 
81. Patel S, DeLaney TF. Advanced -technology radiation therapy for
 
bone sarcomas. Cancer Control. 2008;15(1):21 -37.
 
82. Perry DJ, Chan K, Wolden S, et al. High -dose -rate intraoperative 
radiation therapy for recurrent head -and-neck cancer. Int J 
 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76(4):1140 -1146. 
 
83. Picot J, Copley V, Colquitt JL, et al. The INTRABEAM Photon 
 
Radiotherapy System for the adjuvant treatment of early breast 
 
cancer: A systematic review and economic evaluation. Health 
 
Technol Assess. 2015;19(69):1 -190. 
 
84. Pierce LJ, Sabel MS. Role of radiation therapy in breast 
 
conservation therapy. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: 
UpToDate; reviewed July 2013. 
 
85. Ratto C, Valentini V, Morganti AG, et al. Combined -modality       
         
  
 
          
  
 
        
  
  
          
  
  
  
       
  
 
         
 
  
        
  
 
          
  
 
           
 
 
  
       
        
  
 
        
 
 
    
        
            
  
         
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 61 of 66 
therapy in locally advanced primary rectal cancer. Dis Colon 
 
Rectum. 2003;46(1):59 -67.
 
86. Roeder F, Morillo V, Saleh -Ebrahimi L, et al. Intraoperative 
radiation therapy (IORT) for soft tissue sarcoma -ESTRO IORT 
 
Task Force / ACROP recommendations. Radiother Oncol. 
 
2020;150:293 -302. 
 
87. Ruano -Ravina A, Almazán Ortega R, Guedea F. Intraoperative 
radiotherapy in pancreatic cancer: A systematic review. 
 
Radiother Oncol. 2008;87(3):318 -325. 
 
88. Ruano -Ravina A, Cantero- Muñoz P, Eraso Urién A. Eﬃcacy and
 
safety of intraoperative radiotherapy in breast cancer: A 
 
systematic review. Cancer Lett. 2011;313(1):15 -25.
 
89. Russo S, Butler J, Ove R, Blackstock AW. Locally advanced 
 
pancreatic cancer: Areview.Semin Oncol. 2007;34(4):327 -334. 
 
90. Saracino B, Gallucci M, De Carli P, et al. Phase I -II study of 
 
intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT) after radical 
 
prostatectomy for prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2008;71(4):1049 -1056. 
 
91. Sauer R, Sautter -Bihl ML, Budach W, et al. Accelerated partial 
breast irradiation: Consensus statement of 3 German Oncology 
 
societies. Cancer. 2007;110(6):1187 -1194. 
 
92. Sawaki M, Kondo N, Horio A, et al. Feasibility of intraoperative 
radiation therapy for early breast cancer in Japan: A single -center 
 
pilot study and literature review. Breast Cancer. 2014;21(4):415 ­
422. 
93. Schild SE, Gunderson LL, Haddock MG, et al. The treatment of 
locally advanced colon cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
1997;37(1):51 -58.
 
94. Sedlmayer F, Zehentmayr F, Fastner G. Partial breast re -
irradiation for local recurrence of breast carcinoma: Beneﬁt and 
long term side eﬀects. Breast. 2013;22 Suppl 2:S141 -S146. 
 
95. Shah C, Badiyan S, Khwaja S, et al. Evaluating radiotherapy 
 
options in breast cancer: Does intraoperative radiotherapy 
 
represent the most cost -eﬃcacious option? Clin Breast Cancer. 
 
2014;14(2):141 -146. 
 
96. Sharma S, Odunsi K, Driscoll D, et al. Pelvic exenterations for 
gynecological malignancies: Twenty-year experience at Roswell 
 
Park Cancer Institute. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2005;15(3):475 -482. 
 
97. Shibamoto Y, Manabe T, Baba N, et al. High dose, external beam 
and intraoperative radiotherapy in the treatment of resectable 
 
and unresectable pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
 
1990;19(3):605 -611. 
       
 
 
 
       
 
          
             
  
          
             
  
   
      
 
 
       
          
 
  
           
   
 
       
            
        
  
 
   
       
      
  
         
   
         
 
 
   
  
  
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna 	 Page 62 of 66 
98. Showalter TN, Rao AS, Rani Anne P, et al. Does intraoperative 
radiation therapy improve local tumor control in patients 
 
undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic 
 
adenocarcinoma? A propensity score analysis. Ann Surg Oncol. 
 
2009;16(8):2116 -2122. 
 
99. Silverstein MJ, Fastner G, Maluta S, et al. Intraoperative radiation 
therapy: A critical analysis of the ELIOT and TARGIT trials. Part 1 -­
ELIOT. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014a;21(12):3787 -3792. 
100.	 Silverstein MJ, Fastner G, Maluta S, et al. Intraoperative radiation 
therapy: A critical analysis of the ELIOT and TARGIT trials. Part 2 -­
TARGIT. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014b;21(12):3793 -3799. 
101.	 Skandarajah AR, Lynch AC, Mackay JR, et al. The role of 
intraoperative radiotherapy in solid tumors. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2009;16(3):735 -744. 
102.	 Sorrentino L, Fissi S, Meaglia I, et al. One -step intraoperative 
radiotherapy optimizes conservative treatment of breast cancer 
with advantages in quality of life and work resumption. Breast. 
2018;39:123 -130. 
103.	 Stevens KR, JR. The Colon and Rectum. In: Moss; Radiation 
Oncology. 7th ed. JD Cox, ed. St Louis, MO: Mosby; 1994:480 -481. 
104.	 Taghian A, El -Ghamry MN, Merajver SD. Overview of the treatment 
of newly diagnosed, non -metastatic breast cancer. UpToDate 
[online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed June 2014. 
105.	 Takanen S, Gambirasio A, Gritti G, et al. Breast cancer electron 
intraoperative radiotherapy: Assessment of preoperative 
selection factors from a retrospective analysis of 758 patients 
and review of literature. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 
2017;165(2):261 -271. 
106.	 Taylor WE, Donohue JH, Gunderson LL, et al. The Mayo Clinic 
experience with multimodality treatment of locally advanced or 
recurrent colon cancer. Ann Surg Oncol. 2002;9(2):177 -85. 
107.	 Thangarajah F, Heilmann J, Malter W, et al. Breast conserving 
surgery in combination with intraoperative radiotherapy after 
previous external beam therapy: An option to avoid mastectomy. 
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2018;168(3):739 -744. 
108.	 Tzeng CW, Fiveash JB, Heslin MJ. Radiation therapy for 
retroperitoneal sarcoma. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 
2006;6(8):1251 -1260. 
109.	 Vaidya A, Vaidya P, Both B, et al. Health economics of targeted 
intraoperative radiotherapy (TARGIT -IORT) for early breast canc er: 
A cost -eﬀectiveness analysis in the United Kingdom. BMJ Open. 
2017;7(8):e014944.       
  
        
       
  
             
  
  
       
  
  
 
         
  
   
       
 
             
 
  
  
            
   
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
        
 
 
    
      
  
            
 
  
  
      Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna 	 Page 63 of 66 
110.	 Vaidya JS, Joseph DJ, Tobias JS, etal. Targeted intraoperative 
radiotherapy versus whole breast radiotherapy for breast cancer 
(TARGIT -A trial): An international, prospective, randomised, non-
inferiority phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2010;376(9735):91 -102. 
111.	 Vaidya JS, Wenz F, Bulsara M, et al; TARGIT trialists' group. Risk-
adapted targeted intraoperative radiotherapy versus whole -
breast radiotherapy for br east cancer: 5 -year results for local 
control and overall survival from the TARGIT -A randomised trial. 
Lancet. 2014;383(9917):603 -613. 
112.	 Valente SA, Tendulkar RD, Cherian S, et al. TARGIT -R 
(Retrospective): North American experience with intraoperative 
radiation using low-kilovoltage X-rays for breast cancer. Ann Surg 
Oncol. 2016;23(9):2809 -2815. 
113.	 Valentini V, Balducci M, Tortoreto F, et al. Intraoperative 
radiotherapy: Current thinking. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2002;28(2):180 ­
185. 
114.	 Valentini V, Morganti AG, De Franco A, et al. Chemoradiation with or 
without intraoperative radiation therapy in patients with locally 
recurrent rectal carcinoma: Prognostic factors and long term 
outcome. Cancer. 1999;86(12):2612 -2624. 
115.	 Van De Voorde L, Delrue L, van Eijkeren M, De Meerleer G. 
Radiotherapy and surgery -An indispensable duo in the 
treatment of retroperitoneal sarcoma. Cancer. 
2011;117(19):4355 -4364. 
116.	 Vanderwalde NA, Jones EL, Kimple RJ, et al. Phase 2 study of pre­
excision single -dose intraoperative radiation therapy for early -
stage breast cancers: Six -year update with application of the 
ASTRO accelerated partial breast irradiation consensus statemen t 
criteria. Cancer. 2013;119(9):1736 -1743. 
117.	 Weil RJ, Mavinkurve GG, Chao ST, et al. Intraoperative 
radiotherapy to treat newly diagnosed solitary brain metastasis: 
Initial experience and long -term outcomes. J Neurosurg. 
2015;122(4):825 -832. 
118.	 Wenz F, Schneide r F, Neumaier C, et al. Kypho -IORT --a novel 
approach of intraoperative radiotherapy during kyphoplasty for 
vertebral metastases. Radiat Oncol. 2010;5:11. 
119.	 Wernicke AG, Yondorf MZ, Peng L, et al. Phase I/II study of 
resection and intraoperative cesium -131 radioisotope 
brachytherapy in patients with newly diagnosed brain 
metastases. J Neurosurg. 2014;121(2):338 -348. 
120.	 Wilkowski R, Wolf M, Heinemann V. Primary advanced 
unresectable pancreatic cancer. Recent Results Cancer Res.       
 
 
        
  
  
 
 
         
 
 
  
       
  
     
        
 
 
  
        
  Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna 	 Page 64 of 66 
2008;177:79 -93. 
121.	 Willett CG, Czito BG, Tyler DS. Intraoperative radiation therapy. J 
Clin Oncol. 2007;25(8):971 -977. 
 
122.	 Yap OW, Kapp DS, Teng NN, et al. Intraoperative radiation therapy 
 
in recurrent ovarian cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2005;63(4):1114 -1121. 
 
123.	 Yeung JM, Ngan S, Lynch C, Heriot AG. Intraoperative 
radiotherapy and colorectal cancer. Minerva Chir. 
 
2010;65(2):161 -171. 
 
124.	 Yu WW, Guo YM, Zhang Q, Fu S. Beneﬁts from adjuvant 
	
intraoperative radiotherapy treatment for gastric cancer: A meta -
analysis. Mol Clin Oncol. 2015;3(1):185 -189. 
 
125.	 Zurrida S, Leonardi MC, Del Castillo A, et al. Accelerated partial 
 
breast irradiation in early breast cancer: Focus on intraoperative 
treatment with electrons (ELIOT). Womens Health (Lond Engl). 
 
2012;8(1):89 -98.
 
126.	 Zygogianni GA, Kyrgias G, Kouvaris J, et al. Intraoperative 
 
radiation therapy on pancreatic cancer patients: A review of the 
literature. Minerva Chir. 2011;66(4):361 -369. 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
       
                
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 65 of 66 
Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan be nefits and 
constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or 
program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna or 
its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin m ay be 
updated and therefore is subject to change. 
Copyright © 2001 -2021 Aetna Inc.       
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 66 of 66 
AETNA BETTER HEALTH® OF PENNSYLVANIA 
Amendment to 
 
Aetna Clinical Policy Bulletin Number: 0721 Intraoperative 
 
Radiation Therapy (IORT) 
 
There are no amendments for Medicaid. 
annual 11/01/2021 