Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  1   DRUG POLICY  
 
Adalimumab  
NOTICE  
 
This policy contains information which is clinical in nature. The policy is not medical advice. The information 
in this policy is used by Wellmark to make determinations whether medical treatment is covered under the 
terms of a Wellmark member's health benefit plan. Physicians and other health care providers are 
responsible for medical advice and treatment. If you have specific health care needs, you should consult 
an appropriate health c are professional. If you would like to request an accessible version of this document, 
please contact customer service at 800 -524-9242.  
 
BENEFIT APPLICATION  
 
Benefit determinations are based on the applicable contract language in effect at the time the se rvices were 
rendered. Exclusions, limitations or exceptions may apply. Benefits may vary based on contract, and 
individual member benefits must be verified. Wellmark determines medical necessity only if the benefit 
exists and no contract exclusions are app licable. This medical policy may not apply to FEP. Benefits are 
determined by the Federal Employee Program.  
 
DESCRIPTION  
 
The intent of the Adalimumab drug policy is to ensure appropriate selection of patients for therapy based 
on product labeling, clinical guidelines and clinical studies.  
 
The indications below including FDA -approved indications and compendial uses are considered a covered 
benefit  provided that all the approval criteria are met and the member has no exclusions to the presc ribed 
therapy.  
 
FDA-Approved Indications  
Humira   
1. Reducing signs and symptoms, inducing major clinical response, inhibiting the progression of 
structural damage, and improving physical function in adult patients with moderately to severely 
active RA.  
2. Redu cing signs and symptoms of moderately to severely active polyarticular JIA in patients 2 years 
of age and older.  
3. Reducing signs and symptoms, inhibiting the progression of structural damage, and improving 
physical function in adult patients with active PsA .  
4. Reducing signs and symptoms in adult patients with active AS.  
5. The treatment of moderately to severely active C rohn’s disease in adult and pediatric patien ts 6 
years of age and older.    
6. The treatment of moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis i n adults and pediatric patients 5 
years of age and older.   
Limitations of Use: The effectiveness of Humira has not been established in patients who have lost 
response to or were intolerant to TNF blockers.  
Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  2 7. The treatment of adult patients with moderate to severe chronic plaque psoriasis who are 
candidates for systemic therapy or phototherapy, and when other systemic therapies are medically 
less appropriate.  
8. The treatment of moderate to severe hidradenitis su ppurativa in patients 12 years of age and older.  
9. The treatment of non -infectious intermediate, posterior, and panuveitis in adults and pediatric 
patients 2 years of age and older.  
 
Amjevita  
1. Reducing signs and symptoms, inducing major clinical response, inhibiting the progression of 
structural damage, and improving physical function in adult patients with moderately to severely 
active rheumatoid arthritis, alone or in combination with methotrexate or other non -biologic 
DMARDs.  
2. Reducing signs and  symptoms of moderately to severely active polyarticular juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis in patients 2 years of age and older, alone or in combination with methotrexate.  
3. Reducing signs and symptoms, inhibiting the progression of structural damage, and improv ing 
physical function in adult patients with active psoriatic arthritis, alone or in combination with non -
biologic DMARDs.  
4. Reducing signs and symptoms in adult patients with active ankylosing spondylitis.  
5. The treatment of moderately to severely active Croh n's disease in adults and pediatric patients 6 
years of age and older.  
6. The treatment of moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis in adult patients. The effectiveness 
of adalimumab products has not been established in patients who have lost response  to or were 
intolerant to TNF blockers.  
7. The treatment of adult patients with moderate to severe chronic plaque psoriasis who are 
candidates for systemic therapy or phototherapy, and when other systemic therapies are medically 
less appropriate.  
8. The treatme nt of moderate to severe hidradenitis suppurativa in adult patients.  
 
Compendial Use s 
1. Axial spondyloarthritis  
2. Behcet's disease  
3. Pyoderma gangrenosum  
4. Oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis  
5. Immunotherapy -related inflammatory arthritis  
 
POLICY  
 
Documentation  
Submission of the following information is necessary to initiate the prior authorization review:  
 
A. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)  
1. For initial requests:  
i. Chart notes, medical record documentation, or claims history supporting previous medications 
tried (if applicable), including response to therapy. If therapy is not advisable, documentation of 
clinical reason to avoid therapy.  
ii. Laboratory results, chart no tes, or medical record documentation of biomarker testing (i.e., 
rheumatoid factor [RF], anti -cyclic citrullinated peptide [anti -CCP], and C -reactive protein [CRP] 
and/or erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ESR]) (if applicable).  
2. For continuation requests: Ch art notes or medical record documentation supporting positive 
clinical response.  
 
B. Articular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and active axial spondyloarthritis:  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  3 1. Initial requests: Chart notes, medical record documentation, or claim s history supporting previous 
medications tried (if applicable), including response to therapy. If therapy is not advisable, 
documentation of clinical reason to avoid therapy.  
2. Continuation requests: Chart notes or medical record documentation supporting po sitive clinical 
response.  
 
C. Psoriatic arthritis (PsA): For continuation requests: Chart notes or medical record documentation 
supporting positive clinical response.  
 
D. Crohn’s disease  
1. Initial requests  
i. Chart notes, medical record documentation, or claims hist ory supporting previous medications 
tried (if applicable), including response to therapy. If therapy is not advisable, documentation of 
clinical reason to avoid therapy.  
ii. Chart notes or medical record documentation supporting diagnosis of fistulizing Crohn’ s 
disease (if applicable)  
2. Continuation requests: Chart notes or medical record documentation supporting positive clinical 
response to therapy or remission.  
 
E. Ulcerative colitis  
1. Initial requests  
i. Chart notes, medical record documentation, or claims history supporting previous medications 
tried (if applicable), including response to therapy. If therapy is not advisable, documentation of 
clinical reason to avoid therapy.  
ii. Chart notes or medical record documentation of hospitalization due to acute, sever e ulcerative 
colitis (if applicable)  
2. Continuation requests: Chart notes or medical record documentation supporting positive clinical 
response to therapy or remission.  
 
F. Plaque psoriasis  
1. Initial requests:  
i. Chart notes or medical record documentation of affe cted area(s) and body surface area 
(BSA) affected  (if applicable).  
ii. Chart notes, medical record documentation, or claims history supporting previous 
medications tried (if applicable), including response to therapy. If therapy is not advisable, 
documentation of clinical reason to avoid therapy.  
2. Continuation requests: Chart notes or medical record documentation of decreased body surface 
area (BSA) affected and/or improvement in signs and symptoms.  
 
G. Hidradenitis suppurativa  
1. Initial requests: Chart notes, medical record documentation, or claims history supporting previous 
medications tried (if applicable), including response to therapy. If therapy is not advisable, 
documentation of clinical reason to avoid therapy.  
2. Continuati on requests: Chart notes or medical record documentation supporting positive clinical 
response to therapy.  
 
H. Uveitis (n on-infectious intermediate, posterior and panuveitis )  
1. Initial requests: Chart notes, medical record documentation, or claims history supp orting previous 
medications tried (if applicable), including response to therapy. If therapy is not advisable, 
documentation of clinical reason to avoid therapy.  
2. Continuation requests: Chart notes or medical record documentation supporting positive clinic al 
response to therapy.  
 Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  4 I. Behcet’s disease (initial requests only): Chart notes, medical record documentation, or claims history 
supporting previous medications tried, including response to therapy (if applicable).  
 
J. Pyoderma gangrenosum  and immunotherapy -related inflammatory arthritis  (initial requests only): 
Chart notes, medical record documentation, or claims history supporting previous medications tried (if 
applicable), including response to therapy. If therapy is not advisable, documentation of clinical 
reason to avoid therapy  
 
Prescriber Specialties  (initial approvals only)  
This medication must be prescribed by or in consultation with one of the following:  
A. Rheumatoid arthritis, articular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, axial 
spondy loarthritis, and Behcet’s disease: rheumatologist  
B. Psoriatic arthritis and hidradenitis suppurativa: rheumatologist or dermatologist  
C. Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis: gastroenterologist  
D. Plaque psoriasis  and pyoderma gangrenosum: dermatologist  
E. Uveitis: ophthalmologist or rheumatologist  
F. Immunotherapy -related inflammatory arthritis: oncologist, hematologist, or rheumatologist  
Criteria for Initial Approval  
A. Moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis (RA)  
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  adult  members who have previously received a 
biologic  or targeted synthetic DMARD (e.g., Rinvoq, Xeljanz) indicated for  moderately to 
severely active rheumatoid arthritis . 
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  adult members for  treatment of moderately to 
severely active RA when all of the following criteria are met: 
i. Member meets either of the following criteria:  
a. Member has been tested for either of the following biom arkers and the test 
was positive:  
1. Rheumatoid Factor (RF)  
2. Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti -CCP)  
b. Member has been tested for ALL of the following biomarkers:  
1. RF 
2. Anti-CCP  
3. C-reactive protein (CRP) and/or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)  
ii. Member meets either of the following criteria:  
a. Member has experienced an inadequate response to at least a 3 -month trial 
of methotrexate despite adequate dosing (i.e., titrated to at least 15  mg/week).  
b. Member has an intolerance or contraindication to methotrexate (see Appendix 
A). 
 
B. Articular juvenile idiopathic arthritis  (JIA)  
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for members  2 years of age and older  who have 
previously received a biologic  or targeted synthetic DMARD  indicated for moderately to 
severely active articular juvenile idiopathic arthritis.  
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted  for members 2 years of age and older  for treatment 
of moderately to severely active articular juvenile idiopathic arthritis  when  any of the following 
criteria is met:  
a. The m ember has had an inadequate response to methotrexate  or another non -biologic 
DMARD administered at an adequate dose and duration.  
b. The m ember has had an inadequate response to a trial of scheduled non -steroidal anti -
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and/or intra -articular glucocorticoids (e.g., triamcinolone 
hexacetonide) and one of the following risk factors for poor outcome:  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  5 i. Involvement of ank le, wrist, hip, sacroiliac joint, and/or temporomandibular joint (TMJ)  
ii. Presence of erosive disease or enthesitis  
iii. Delay in diagnosis  
iv. Elevated levels of inflammation markers  
v. Symmetric disease  
c. The m ember has risk factors (See Appendix E) and the member also m eets one of the 
following:  
i. High-risk joints are involved (e.g., cervical spine, wrist, or hip).  
ii. High disease activity.  
iii. Are judged to be at high risk for disabling joint disease.  
 
C. Psoriatic arthritis (PsA)  
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  adult  members who have previously received 
a biologic or targeted synthetic drug (e.g., Rinvoq, Otezla) indicated for active psoriatic 
arthritis.  
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  adult  members for treatment of active 
psoriatic arthritis when either of the following criteria is met:  
a. Member has mild to moderate disease and meets one of the following criteria:  
i. Member has had an inadequate response to methotrexate, leflunomide, or another 
conventional synthetic drug (e.g., sulfasalazine) admini stered at an adequate dose 
and duration.  
ii. Member has an intolerance or contraindication to methotrexate or leflunomide (see 
Appendix A), or another conventional synthetic drug (e.g., sulfasalazine).  
iii. Member has enthesitis or predominantly axial disease.  
                    b. Member has severe disease.  
D. Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and active axial spondyloarthritis  (axSpA)  
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  members who have previously received a 
biologic  or targeted synthetic drug (e.g., Rinvoq, Xeljanz)  indicated for active ankylosing 
spondylitis  or active axial spondyloarthritis . 
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  treatment of active ankylosing spondylitis and 
active axial spondyloarthritis when any of the following criteria i s met:  
a. Member has experienced an inadequate response to at least two non -steroidal anti -
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).  
b. Member has an intolerance or contraindication to two or more NSAIDs.  
 
E. Moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease (CD)  
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for adult members who have previously received a 
biologic indicated for treatment of Crohn’s disease.  
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  adult members for  treatment of mod erately to 
severely active CD when  the member has had an inadequate response, intolerance or 
contraindication to at least one conventional therapy option (see Appendix B).  
3. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for treatment of fistulizing CD  in adult members .  
4. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for treatment of moderately to severely active CD 
when the member is less than 18 years of age.  
 
F. Moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis (UC)  
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for members  5 years of age and older  who have 
previously received a biologic  or targeted synthetic drug (e.g. , Xeljanz)  indicated for treatment 
of moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis .  
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  members 5 years of age and older for  treatment 
of mod erately to severely active UC when  the member has had an inadequate response, 
intolerance or contraindication to at least one conventional therapy option (see Appendix C).  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  6 3. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for members  5 years of age and older  who have  
ever been hospitalized for acute severe UC (e.g., continuous bleeding, severe toxic symptoms, 
including fever and anorexia).  
 
G. Plaque psoriasis (PsO)  
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  adult  members who have previously received  a 
biologic or targeted synthetic drug (e.g., Sotyktu, Otezla)  indicated for the treatment of 
moderate to severe plaque psoriasis.  
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  adult members for  treatment of moderate to  
severe plaque psoriasis in members when any of the following criteria is met: 
a. Crucial body areas (e.g., hands, feet, face, neck, scalp, genitals/groin, intertriginous areas) 
are affected.  
b. At least 10% of the body surface area (BSA) is affected  
c. At least 3%  of body surface area (BSA) is affected and the member meets any of the 
following criteria:  
i. Member has had an inadequate response or intolerance to either phototherapy (e.g., 
UVB, PUVA) or pharmacologic treatment with methotrexate, cyclosporine or acitreti n. 
ii. Member has a clinical reason to avoid pharmacologic treatment with methotrexate, 
cyclosporine and acitretin (see Appendix D).  
 
H. Moderate to severe hidradenitis suppurativa   
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for members  12 years of age and older  who have 
previously received a biologic indicated for treatment of moderate to severe hidradenitis 
suppurativa.  
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  members 12 years of age and older for  
treatment of moderate to severe hidradenitis suppurat iva when either of the following is met:  
a. Member has experienced an inadequate response to oral antibiotics for at least 90 days.  
b. Member has an intolerance or contraindication to oral antibiotics.  
 
I. Uveitis (non -infectious intermediate, posterior and panuvei tis) 
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  members  2 years of age and older  who have 
previously received a biologic indicated for  non-infectious  intermediate, posterior and 
panuveitis.  
2. Authorization of 12 months may be grante d for members 2 years of age and older for  treatment 
of non -infectious intermediate, posterior and panuveitis when either of the following is met:  
a. Member has experienced an inadequate response with corticosteroids or 
immunosuppressive therapy  (e.g., azathioprine, cyclospo rine, methotrexate).  
b. Member has an intolerance or contraindication to corticosteroids and immunosuppressive 
therapy (e.g., azathioprine, cyclosporine, methotrexate).  
 
J. Behcet’s disease  
1. Authorization of 12  months may be granted for members who have previous ly received 
Otezla or a biologic indicated for the treatment of Behcet’s disease . 
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for the treatment of Beh cet’s disease when the 
member has had an inadequate response to at least one nonbiologic medication for Beh cet’s 
disease (e.g., apremilast, colchicine, systemic glucocorticoids, azathioprine).  
 
K. Pyoderma gangrenosum  
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for members who have previous ly received  a 
biologic indicated for treatment of pyoderma gangrenosum.  
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for treatment of pyoderma gangrenosum when 
either of the following is met:  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  7 a. Member has experienced an inad equate response to corticosteroids  or 
immunosuppressive therapy  (e.g., cyclosporine  or mycophenolate mofetil) . 
Member has an intolerance or contraindication to corticosteroids and immunosuppressive 
therapy ( e.g., cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil).  
 
L. Immunotherapy -related inflammatory arthritis  
Authorization of 12 months may be granted for treatment of severe/refractory immunotherapy -
related inflammatory arthritis  and has experienced an inadequate response, intolerance, or 
contraindication  to corticost eroids . 
 
Continuation of Therapy  
A. Moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis (RA)  
Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis and who 
achieve or maintain a positive clinical response as evidenced by disease activity improvement of 
at least 20% from baseline in tender joint count, swollen joint count, pain, or disability.  
 
B. Articular juvenile idiopathic arthritis  (JIA)  
Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for moderately to severely active articular juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis and who achieve or maintain a posi tive clinical response as evidenced by low disease 
activity or improvement in signs and symptoms of the condition when there is improvement in any 
of the following from baseline:  
1. Number of joints with active arthritis (e.g., swelling, pain, limitation of m otion)  
2. Number of joints with limitation of movement  
3. Functional ability  
 
C. Psoriatic arthritis (PsA)  
Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for active psoriatic arthritis and wh o achieve or maintain a  positive 
clinical response as evidenced by low disease activity or improvement in signs and symptoms of 
the condition when there is improvement in any of the following from baseline:  
1. Number of swollen joints  
2. Number of tender joints  
3. Dactylitis  
4. Enthesitis  
5. Axial disease  
6. Skin and/or nail involvement  
 
D. Active ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and active axial spondyloarthritis  (axSpA)  
Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all  members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for active ankylosing spondylitis or active axial spondyloarthritis  
and who achieve or maintain  positive clinical response with the requested medication as evidenced 
by low disease acti vity or improvement in signs and symptoms of the condition when there is 
improvement in any of the following from baseline:  
1. Functional status  
2. Total spinal pain  
3. Inflammation ( e.g., morning stiffness)  
 
E. Moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  8 1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease  and who 
achieve or maintain remission.  
 
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for  all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease and who 
achieve or maintain a positive clinical response as evidenced by low disease activity or 
improvement in signs and symptoms  of the condition when there is improvement in any of the 
following from baseline:  
i. Abdominal pain or tenderness  
ii. Diarrhea  
iii. Body weight  
iv. Abdominal mass  
v. Hematocrit  
vi. Endoscopic appearance of the mucosa  
vii. Improvement on a disease activity scoring tool (e.g., Crohn’s Disease Activity Index 
[CDAI] score)  
 
F. Moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis  
1. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for moderately to severely active ulcera tive colitis and who 
achieve or maintain  remission.  
 
2. Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis and who 
achieve or maintain a  positive clinical response as evidenced by low disease activity or 
improvement in signs and symptoms of the condition when there is improvement in any of the 
following from baseline:  
i. Stool frequency  
ii. Rectal bleeding  
iii. Urgency of defecation  
iv. C-reactive pro tein (CRP)  
v. Fecal calprotectin (F C) 
vi. Endoscop ic appearance of the mucosa  
vii. Improvement on a disease activity scoring tool (e.g., Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic 
Index of Severity [UCEIS ], Mayo score )  
 
G. Moderate to severe plaque psoriasis  
Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for moderate to severe plaque psoriasis and who achieve or 
maintain  a positive clinical response as evidenced by low disease activity o r improvement in signs 
and symptoms of the condition when any of the following is met:  
1. Reduction in body surface area (BSA) affected from baseline  
2. Improvement in signs and symptoms from baseline (e.g. , itching, redness, flaking, 
scaling, burning, cracking,  pain)  
 
H. Moderate to severe hidradenitis suppurativa  
Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for moderate to severe hidradenitis suppurativa and who achieve 
or maintain a posit ive clinical response as evidenced by low disease activity or improvement in 
signs and symptoms of the condition when any of the following is met:  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  9 1. Reduction in abscess and inflammatory nodule count from baseline  
2. Reduced formation of new sinus tracts and s carring  
3. Decrease in frequency of inflammatory lesions from baseline  
4. Reduction in pain from baseline  
5. Reduction in suppuration from baseline  
6. Improvement in frequency of relapses from baseline  
7. Improvement in quality of life from baseline  
8. Improvement on a dise ase severity assessment tool from baseline  
 
I. Uveitis (non -infectious intermediate, posterior and panuveitis)  
Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for non -infectious intermediate, posterior, and panuveitis and who 
achieve or maintain a positive clinical response as evidenced by low  disease activity or 
improvement in signs and symptoms of the condition when the patient meets any of the following:  
1. Reduced frequency of disease flares  compared to baseline  
2. Stability or improvement  in anterior chamber (AC) cell grade  compared to baseline  
3. Stability or improvement  in vitreous  haze (VH) grade  compared to baseline  
4. Stability or improvement in  visual acuity  compared to baseline  
5. Reduction in glucocorticoid requirements from baseline  
6. No new active inflammatory chorioretinal  and/or inflammatory retinal vascular lesions 
relative to baseline  
 
J. Immunotherapy -related inflammatory arthritis  
All members (including new members) requesting authorization for continuation of therapy must 
meet all initial authorization criteria.  
 
K. All other indications  
Authorization of 12 months may be granted for all members (including new members) who are 
using the requested medication for an indication outlined in Section III and  who achieve or maintain 
a positive clinical response with the requ ested medication as evidenced by low disease activity or 
improvement in signs and symptoms of the condition.  
Note: Post Limit Quantity Exception Criteria available for Crohn’s disease , Plaque Psoriasis , and Ulcerative 
Colitis  that will allow for dose escal ation in patients experiencing a partial response, nonresponse, or a loss 
of response to the current dosing regimen . 
 
Other  
For all indications: Member has had a documented negative TB test (which can include a tuberculosis skin 
test [PPD], an interferon -release assay [IGRA], or a chest x -ray)* within 6 months of initiating therapy for 
persons who are naïve to biologic DMARDs or targeted synthetic DMARDs associated with an increased 
risk of TB. 
 
*If the screening testing for TB is positive, there must be further testing to confirm there is no active disease. 
Do not administer adalimumab to members with active TB infection. If there is latent disease, TB treatment 
must be started before initiation of adalimumab.  
 
For all indications: Member cannot use Humira concomitantly with any other biologic DMARD or targeted 
synthetic DMARD.  
 
Humira  is considered not medically necessary  for members who do not meet the criteria set forth above.  
 
Dosage and Administration  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  10 Approvals may be subject to dosing limits in accordance with FDA -approved labeling, accepted compendia, 
and/or evidence -based practice guidelines.  For rheumatoid arthritis, member must initiate treatment with 
every other week dosing.  
 
Quantity Limits  
Medication  Standard Limit  FDA-recommended dosing  
Humira (adalimumab) 10 mg/0.1 mL  
single -use prefilled syringe  4 syringes per 
28 days  RA/PsA/AS  
• 40 mg every other week  
• For RA, patients not taking concomitant 
methotrexate: may increase to 40 mg every 
week or 80 mg every other week if needed  
 
PJIA/Pediatric uveitis (2 years and up)  
• 10 kg to < 15 kg: 10 mg every other week  
• 15 kg to < 30 kg: 20 mg every other week  
•  ≥ 30 kg: 40 mg every other week  
 
Pediatric CD * (6 years and up)  
• 17 kg to < 40 kg: loading doses of 80 mg on 
day 1 and 40 mg two weeks later (day 15); 
maintenance dose (starting at week 4 (day 29) 
of 20 mg every other week  
• ≥ 40 kg: loading doses of 160 mg on day 1 
(given in one day or split over two consecutive 
days) and 80 mg two weeks later (day 15); 
maintenance dose starting at week 4 (day 29) 
of 40 mg every other week  
 
Pediatric UC (5 years and up)  
• 20 kg to < 40 kg: loading doses of 80 mg on 
day 1 , 40 mg one week later (day 8) and 40 
mg one week after that (day 15) ; maintenance 
dose (starting at week 4 (day 29) of 40 mg 
every other week  or 20 mg every week  
• ≥ 40 kg: loading doses of 160 mg on day 1 
(given in one day or split over two consecutive 
days) , 80 mg one week later (day 8) and 80 
mg one week after that (day 1 5); maintenance 
dose starting at week 4 (day 29) of 80 mg 
every other week  or 40 mg every week  
 
Adult CD * and UC  
• Loading doses: 160 mg on day 1 (given in one 
day or split over two consecutive days), 
followed by 80 mg two weeks later (day 15)   Humira (adalimumab) 10 mg/0.2 mL  
single -use prefilled syringe  4 syringes per 
28 days  
Humira (adalimumab) 20 mg/0.2 mL  
single -use prefilled syringe  4 syringes per 
28 days  
Humira (adalimumab) 20 mg/0.4 mL  
single -use prefilled syringe  4 syringes per 
28 days  
Humira (adalimumab) 40 mg/0.4 mL  
single -use prefilled syringe/pen  4 syringes /pens  
per 28 days  
Humira (adalimumab) 40 mg/0.8 mL 
single -use prefilled syringe/pen  4 syringes /pens  
per 28 days  
Humira (adalimumab) 80 mg/0.8 mL  
single -use prefilled pen  2 pens  per 28 
days  
Humira (adalimumab) 40 mg/0.8 mL  
Pediatric Crohn’s Disease Starter 
Pack  1 pack per 
lifetime  
Humira (adalimumab) 80 mg/0.8 mL  
Pediatric Crohn’s Disease Starter 
Pack  1 pack per 
lifetime  
Humira (adalimumab) 80 mg/0.8 mL 
and 40 mg/0.4 mL  
Pediatric Crohn’s Disease Starter 
Pack  1 pack per 
lifetime  
Humira (adalimumab) 40 mg/0.8 mL 
pen 
Crohn’s Disease, Ulcerative Colitis, 
or Hidradenitis Suppurativa Starter 
Pack  1 pack per 
lifetime  
Humira (adalimumab) 80 mg/0.8 mL 
pen 
Crohn’s Disease, Ulcerative Colitis, 
or Hidradenitis Suppurativa Starter 
Pack  1 pack per 
lifetime  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  11 Medication  Standard Limit  FDA-recommended dosing  
Humira (adalimumab) 40 mg/0.8 mL 
pen 
Psoriasis/Uveitis /Adolescent 
Hidradenitis Suppurativa  Starter 
Pack  1 pack per 
lifetime  • Maintenance dose: two weeks later (day 29), 
40 mg every other week  
 
Plaque psoriasis */ uveitis  
• 80 mg, followed by 40 mg every other week 
starting one week after the initial dose of 80 
mg 
 
Adolescent hidradenitis suppurativa (12 years 
and up)  
• 30 kg to < 60 kg: 80 mg on day 1, 40 mg on 
day 8 and subsequent doses 40 mg every 
other week  
• ≥ 60 kg: Follow adult dosing  
 
Adult hidradenitis suppurativa  
• Loading doses: 160 mg on day 1 (given in one 
day or split over two consecutive days), 
followed by 80 mg two weeks later (day 15)   
• Maintenance dose: begin 40 mg every week 
or 80 mg every other week  two weeks later 
(day 29)  Humira (adalimumab) 80 mg/0.8 mL 
and 40 mg/0.4 mL  
Psoriasis/Uveitis /Adolescent 
Hidradenitis Suppurativa  Starter 
Pack  1 pack per 
lifetime  
Abbreviations: RA = rheumatoid arthritis; PsA = psoriatic arthritis; AS = ankylosing spondylitis; PJIA = polyarticular juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis; CD = Crohn’s disease; UC = ulcerative colitis  
*Post Limit Quantity Exception Criteria available for CD , plaque psoriasis , and ulcerative colitis  
 
Appendi ces 
Appendix A: Examples of Contraindications to Methotrexate  
1. Clinical diagnosis of alcohol use disorder,  alcoholic liver disease or other chronic liver disease  
2. Breastfeeding  
3. Blood dyscrasias (e.g., thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, significant anemia)  
4. Elevated liver transaminases  
5. History of intolerance or adverse event  
6. Hypersensitivity  
7. Interstitial pneumonitis or clinically significant pulmonary fibrosis  
8. Myelodysplasia  
9. Pregnancy or  currently  planning pregnancy  
10. Renal impairment  
11. Significant drug interaction  
 
Appendix B: Examples of Conventional Therapy Options for CD  
1. Mild to moderate disease – induction of remission:  
a. Oral budesonide  
b. Alternatives: metronidazole, ciprofloxacin, rifaximin  
2. Mild to moderate disease – maintenance of remission:  
a. Azathioprine, mercaptopurine  
b. Alternatives: oral budesonide, methotrexate intramuscular (IM) or subcutaneous (SC),  
sulfasalazine  
3. Moderate to sever e disease – induction of remission:  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  12 a. Prednisone, methylprednisolone intravenous (IV)  
b. Alternatives: methotrexate IM or SC  
4. Moderate to severe disease – maintenance of remission:  
a. Azathioprine, mercaptopurine  
b. Alternative: methotrexate IM or SC  
5. Perianal and fistulizing disease – induction of remission  
a. Metronidazole ± ciprofloxacin , tacrolimus   
6. Perianal and fistulizing disease – maintenance of remission  
a. Azathioprine, mercaptopurine  
b. Alternative: methotrexate IM  or SC  
 
Appendix C: Examples of Conventional Ther apy Options for UC  
1. Mild to moderate disease – induction of remission:  
a. Oral mesalamine (e.g. , Asacol , Asacol HD, Lialda, Pentasa), balsalazide, olsalazine  
b. Rectal mesalamine (e.g. , Canasa , Rowasa)  
c. Rectal hydrocortisone (e.g. , Colocort , Cortifoam)  
d. Alternatives: prednisone, azathioprine, mercaptopurine, sulfasalazine  
2. Mild to moderate disease – maintenance of remission:  
a. Oral mesalamine, balsalazide, olsalazine, rectal mesalamine  
b. Alternatives: azathioprine, mercaptopurine, sulfasalazine  
3. Severe disea se – induction of remission:  
a. Prednisone, hydrocortisone IV, methylprednisolone IV  
b. Alternatives: cyclosporine IV, tacrolimus, sulfasalazine  
4. Severe disease – maintenance of remission:  
a. Azathioprine, mercaptopurine  
b. Alternative: sulfasalazine  
 
Appendix D:  Examples of Clinical Reasons to Avoid Pharmacologic Treatment with Methotrexate, 
Cyclosporine or Acitretin.  
1. Clinical diagnosis of alcohol use disorder , alcoholic liver disease or other chronic liver disease   
2. Breastfeeding  
3. Drug interaction  
4. Cannot be used due to risk of treatment -related toxicity  
5. Pregnancy or  currently  plann ing pregnancy  
6. Significant comorbidity prohibits use of systemic agents (examples include liver or kidney 
disease, blood dyscrasias, uncontrolled hyperte nsion)  
 
APPENDIX E: Risk factors for Articular Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis  
1. Positive rheumatoid factor  
2. Positive anti -cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies  
3. Pre-existing joint damage  
 
PROCEDURES AND BILLING CODES  
 
To report provider services, use appropriate CPT* codes, Alpha Numeric (HCPCS level 2) codes, 
Revenue codes, and/or ICD diagnostic codes.  
• N/A 
 
REFERENCES  
 
• Humira [package insert]. North Chicago, IL: AbbVie Inc.; February 2021 . 
• van der Heijde D, Ramiro S, Landewe  R, et al. 2016 Update of the international ASAS -EULAR 
management recommendations for axial spondyloarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017; 0:1 -14. Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  13 • Sieper J  van der Heijde D, Dougados M, et al. Efficacy and safety of adalimumab in patients with non -
radiographic ax ial spondyloarthritis: results of a randomised placebo -controlled trial (ABILITY -1). Ann 
Rheum Dis. 2013;72(6):815 -22. 
• Smolen JS, Landewé R, Billsma J, et al. EULAR recommendations for the management of rheumatoid 
arthritis with synthetic and biological di sease -modifying antirheumatic drugs: 2016 update. Ann Rheum 
Dis. 2017; 0:1 -18. 
• Singh JA , Saag KG , Bridges SL Jr , et al. 2015  American  College  of Rheumatology  Guideline  for 
the Treatment  of Rheumatoid Arthritis . Arthritis  Rheumatol.  2016;68(1)1 -26.      
• Saag KG, Teng GG, Patkar NM, et al. American College of Rheumatology 2008 recommendations for 
the use of nonbiologic and biologic disease -modifying antirheumatic drugs in rheumatoid arthritis. 
Arthri tis Rheum. 2008;59(6):762 -784.  
• Ringold  S, Angeles -Han ST, Beukelman T, et al. 2019 American College of Rheumatology/Arthritis 
Foundation Guideline for the Treatment of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis: Therapeutic Approaches for 
Non-Systemic Polyarthritis, S acroiliitis, and Enthesitis. Arthritis Care Res . 2019;71(6):717 -734. 
doi:10.1002/acr.23870.  
• Gossec L, Baraliakos X, Kerschbaumer A, et al. European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) 
recommendations for the management of psoriatic arthritis with pharmacolog ical therapies; 2019 
update.  Ann Rheum Dis . 2020;79(6):700 -712. 
• Gladman DD, Antoni C, P Mease, et al. Psoriatic arthritis: epidemiology, clinical features, course, and 
outcome. Ann Rheum Dis  2005;64(Suppl II):ii14 –ii17.  
• Peluso R, Lervolino S, Vitiello M, et al. E xtra-articular manifestations in psoriatic arthritis patients. Clin 
Rheumatol . 2014 May 8. [Epub ahead of print].  
• Menter A, Korman NJ, Elmets  CA, et al. Guidelines of care for the management of psoriasis and 
psoriatic arthritis. Section 6: Guidelines of care for the treatment of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: 
case -based presentations and evidence -based conclusions. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2011; 65(1):137 -
174.  
• Braun J, van den Berg R, Baraliakos X, et al. 2010 update of the ASAS/EULAR recommendations for 
the management of ankylosing spondylitis. Ann Rheum Dis 2011;70:896 –904. 
• Ward MM , Deodhar A , Gensler LS, et al. 2019 Update of the American College of 
Rheumatology/Spondylitis Association of America/Spondyloarthritis Research and Treatment 
Network Recommendations for the Treatment of Ankylosing Spondylitis and Nonradiographic Axial 
Spondyloarthrit is. 
• Talley NJ, Abreu MT, Achkar J, et al. An evidence -based systematic review on medical therapies for 
inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol.  2011;106(Suppl 1):S2 -S25.  
• Lichtenstein GR, Loftus Jr EV, Isaacs KI, et al. ACG Clinical Guideline: Manag ement of Crohn’s 
Disease in Adults. Am J Gastroenterol.  2018;113:481 -517.. 
• Agarwal A, Andrews JM. Systematic review: IBD -associated pyoderma gangrenosum in the biologic 
era, the response to therapy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2013;38(6):563 -572. 
• Arguelles -Arias F, Castro -Laria L, Lobaton T, et al. Characteristics and treatment of pyoderma 
gangrenosum in inflammatory bowel disease. Dig Dis Sci. 2013;58(10):2949 -2954.  
• Marzano AV, Ishak RS, Saibeni S, et al. Autoinflammatory skin disorders in inflammatory bowel 
diseases, pyoderma gangrenosum and Sweet's syndrome: A comprehensive review and disease 
classification criteria. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2013;45(2):202 -210. 
• Hatemi G, Christensen R, Bodaghi, et al. 2018 update of the EULAR recommendations for the 
manageme nt of Behcet’s syndrome. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018.; 77: 808 -818. 
• Menter A, Strober BE, Kaplan DH, et al. Joint AAD -NPF guidelines of care for the management and 
treatment of psoriasis with biologics. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(4):1029 -1072.  
• Tuberculosis (TB). TB risk factors. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved on 15 
November 2021 from:  https://www.cdc.gov/tb/topic/basics/risk.htm . 
• Singh JA, Guyatt G, Ogdie A, et al. 2018 American College of Rheumatology/National Psoriasis 
Foundation Guideline for the Treatment of Psoriatic Arthritis.  Arthritis Rheumatol . 2019;71(1):5 -32. 
doi:10.1002/art.40726.  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. © 
2023 Wellmark Inc.  14 • Feuerstein JD, Isaacs KL, Schneider Y, et al. AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of 
Moderate to Severe Ulcerative Colitis. Gastroenterology 2020; 158:1450.  
• Menter, A, Cordero, KM, Davis, DM, et al. Joint AAD -NPF guidelines of care for the management and 
treatment of  psoriasis in pediatric patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82(1):161 -201. 
• Menter, A, Gelfand, JM, Connor, C, et al. Joint AAD -NPF guidelines of care for the management of 
psoriasis  with systemic nonbiologic therapies. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82(6): 1445 -86. 
• Micromedex® (electronic version). IBM Watson Health, Greenwood Village, Colorado, USA. Available 
at: https://www.micromedexsolutions.com . Accessed August 12, 2021.  
• George, C, Deroide, F, Rustin, M. Pyoderma gangrenosum – a guide to diagnosis and management. 
Clin Med . 2019;19(3): 224 -8. 
• Jaffe G, Dick A, Brezin A, et al. Adalimumab in Patients with Active Noninfectious Uveitis. N Engl J 
Med. 2016; 375: 932 -943.  
• Nguyen QD, Merrill P, Jaffe G, et al. Adalimumab for prevention of uveitic flare in patients with 
inactive non -infectious uveitis controlled by corticosteroids (VISUAL II): a multicentre, double -masked, 
randomized, placebo -controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet.  2016; 17:  388(10050):1183 -92. 
• Aletaha D, Neogi T, Silman, et al. 2010 Rheumatoid arthritis classification criteria: an American 
College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism collaborative initiative. Arthritis 
Rheum . 2010;62(9):2569 -81. 
• Rubin  DT, Ananthakrishnan AN, et al. 2019 ACG Clinical Guideline: Ulcerative Colitis in Adults. Am J 
Gastroentrol. 2019;114:384 -413. 
• Alikhan A, Sayed C, Alavi A, et al. North American clinical management guidelines for hidradenitis 
suppurativa: A publication fr om the United States and Canadian Hidradenitis Suppurativa 
Foundations Part I: Diagnosis, evaluation, and the use of complementary and procedural 
management. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019; 81(1): 76 -90. 
• Alikhan A, Sayed C, Alavi A, et al. North American clinica l management guidelines for hidradenitis 
suppurativa: A publication from the United States and Canadian Hidradenitis Suppurativa 
Foundations Part II: Topical, intralesional, and systemic medical management. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2019; 81(1): 91 -101. 
• Smolen J S, Aletaha D. Assessment of rheumatoid arthritis activity in clinical trials and clinical 
practice. In: UpToDate, Post TW (Ed), UpToDate, Waltham, MA. Available with subscription. URL: 
www.uptodate.com. Accessed March 19, 2021.  
• The NCCN Drugs & Biologics C ompendium 2021 National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Inc. 
Available at: http://www.nccn.org. Accessed August 12, 2021.  
• Feuerstein J, Ho E, Shmidt E, et al. AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Medical Management of 
Moderate to Severe Luminal and Perian al Fistulizing Crohn’s Disease. Gastroenterology. 2021; 
160:2496 -2508.  
• Fraenkel L, Bathon JM, England BR, et al. 2021 American College of Rheumatology guideline for the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthrit Care Res . 2021;0:1 -16. 
• Elmets C, Korman N, et al. Guidelines of Care for the Management and Treatment of Psoriasis with 
Topical Therapy and Alternative Medicine Modalities for Psoriasis Severity Measures. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2021; 84:432 -470.  
• Onel  KB, Horton DB, Lovell DJ, et al. 2021 American College of Rheumatology guideline for the 
treatment of juvenile idiopathic arthritis: therapeutic approaches for oligoarthritis, temporomandibular 
joint arthritis, and systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol . 2022;74(4):553 -569. 
 
POLICY HISTORY  
 
Policy #:  05.02.09  
Reviewed:   April 2023 
Revised:  April 2023 
Current Effective Date: May 18, 2023  