 
Page 1 of 7  
Clinical Policy: Axitinib (Inlyta)  
Reference Number: CP.PHAR. 100 
Effective Date: 05.01.12 
Last Review Date: 02.23  
Line of Business: Commercial, HIM, Medicaid   
 
 
Revision Log  
See Important Reminder  at the end of this policy for important regulatory and legal 
information.  
 Description  Axitinib  (Inlyta
®) is a kinase inhibitor. 
 FDA Approved I ndication (s) 
Inlyta is indicated : 
• In combination with avelumab, for the first- line treatment of patients with advanced renal 
cell carcinoma (RCC) . 
• In combination with pembrolizumab, for the first- line treatment of patients with advanced 
RCC.  
• As a single agent, for the treatment of advanced RCC after failure of one prior systemic therapy . 
 Policy/Criteria  
Provider must submit documentation (including such as office chart notes, lab results or other clinical information ) supporting that member has met all approval criteria.  
 It is the policy of h ealth plans affiliated with  Centene Corporation
® that Inlyta is medically 
necessary  when the following criteria are met:  
 I. Initial Approval Criteria  A. Renal Cell Carcinoma (must meet all) : 
1. Diagnosis of relapsed , metastatic, or stage IV RCC; 
2. Prescribed by or in consultation with an oncologist; 
3. Age ≥ 18 years;  
4. For Inlyta request s, member must  use axitinib, if available, unless contraindicated or 
clinically  significant adverse effects are experienced ;  
5. Prescribed in one of the following ways (a or b):  
a. As single-agent therapy;   
b. For clear cell histology , in combination with Keytruda
® or Bavencio®;* 
*Prior authorization may be required 
6. Request meets one of the following (a or b):* a. Both of the following (i and ii): i. Dose does not exceed 20 mg per day; 
ii. Dose does not exceed 4 tablets per day; 
b. Dose is supported by practice guidelines or peer- reviewed literature for the 
relevant off -label use ( prescrib er must submit supporting evidence ). 
*Prescribed regimen must be FDA -approved or recommended by NCCN   
Approval duration: CLINICAL POLICY   
Axitinib 
 
Page 2 of 7  
Medicaid /HIM  – 6 months  
Commercial – 12 months or duration of request, whichever is less   
 
B. Thyroid Carcinoma (o ff-label ) (must meet all) : 
1. Diagnosis of differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC; i.e., follicular, Hurthle cell or 
papillary thyroid carcinoma) ; 
2. Prescribed by or in consultation with an oncologist;  
3. Age ≥ 18 years;  
4. For Inlyta request s, member must  use axitinib , if available, unless contraindicated or 
clinically significant adverse effects are experienced ;  
5. Disease is unresectable locoregional r ecurrent, persistent , or metastatic; 
6. Disease is not amenable to radioactive iodine therapy;  
7. Failure of Lenvima® or Nexavar®, unless both are contraindicated or clinically 
adverse effects are experienced ;* 
*Prior authorization may be required 
8. Dose is within FDA maximum limit for any FDA -approved indication or is supported 
by practice guidelines or peer -reviewed literature for the relevant off -label use 
(prescriber must submit supporting evidence).*  
*Prescribed regimen must be FDA -approved or recommended by NCCN   
Approval duration:  
Medicaid /HIM  – 6 months  
Commercial – 12 months or duration of request, whichever is less   
 
C. Soft Tissue Sarcoma (off- label)  (must meet all) : 
1. Diagnosis of a lveolar s oft part s arcoma;  
2. Prescribed by or in consultation with an oncologist;  
3. Age ≥ 18 years;  
4. For Inlyta request s, member must  use axitinib, if available, unless contraindicated or 
clinically significant adverse effects are experienced ;  
5. Prescribed in combination with Keytruda®;* 
*Prior authorization may be required 
6. Dose is within FDA maximum limit for any FDA -approved indication or is supported 
by practice guidelines or peer -reviewed literature for the relevant off -label use 
(prescriber must submit supporting evidence) .*  
*Prescribed regimen must be FDA -approved or recommended by NCCN   
Approval duration:  
Medicaid/HIM – 6 months  
Commercial – 12 months or duration of request, whichever is less   
 
D. Other diagnoses/indications  (must meet 1 or 2) : 
1. If this drug has recently (within the last 6 months) undergone a label change (e.g., 
newly approved indication, age expansion, new dosing regimen) that is not yet 
reflected in this policy, refer to one of the following policies (a or b):  
a. For drugs on the for mulary  (commercial, health insurance marketplace) or PDL 
(Medicaid) , the no coverage criteria policy for the relevant line of business: CLINICAL POLICY   
Axitinib 
 
Page 3 of 7  
CP.CPA.190 for commercial, HIM.PA.33 for health insurance marketplace, and 
CP.PMN.255 for Medicaid; or  
b. For drugs NOT on the formulary  (commercial, health insurance marketplace ) or 
PDL (Medicaid) , the non -formulary policy for the relevant line of business: 
CP.CPA.190 for commercial, HIM.PA.103 for health insurance marketplace, and 
CP.PMN.16 for Medicaid; or  
2. If the requested use (e.g., diagnosis, age, dosing regimen)  is NOT specifically listed 
under section III (Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized)  AND 
criterion 1 above does not apply, r efer to the off -label use policy for the relevant line 
of business : CP.CPA.09 for commercial, HIM.PA.154 for health insurance 
marketplace, and CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid.  
 
II. Continued Therapy  
A. All Indications in Section I  (must meet all) : 
1. Currently receiving medication via Centene benefit, or documentation supports that member is currently receiving Inlyta  for a covered indication  and has received this 
medication for at least 30 days;  
2. Member is responding positively to therapy;  
3. For Inlyta r equest s, member must  use axitinib, if available, unless contraindicated or 
clinically significant adverse effects are experienced ;  
4. If request is for a dose increase, request meets one of the following (a or b): * 
a. Both of the following ( i and ii):  
i. New dose does not exceed 20 mg per day ; 
ii. New dose does not exceed 4 tablets per day  
b. New d ose is supported by practice guidelines or peer -reviewed literature for the 
relevant off -label use (prescriber must submit supporting evidence) . 
*Prescribed regimen must be FDA -approved or recommended by NCCN   
Approval duration:  
Medicaid /HIM  –  12 months  
Commercial – 12 months or duration of request, whichever is less   
 
B. Other diagnoses/indications (must meet 1 or 2) : 
1. If this drug has recently (within the last 6 months) undergone a label change (e.g., 
newly approved indication, age expansion, new dosing regimen) that is not yet 
reflected in this policy, refer to one of the following policies (a or b):  
a. For drugs on the for mulary  (commercial, health insurance marketplace) or PDL 
(Medicaid) , the no coverage criteria policy for the relevant line of business: 
CP.CPA.190 for commercial, HIM.PA.33 for health insurance marketplace, and 
CP.PMN.255 for Medicaid; or  
b. For drugs NOT on the formulary  (commercial, health insurance marketplace ) or 
PDL (Medicaid) , the non -formulary policy for the relevant line of business: 
CP.CPA.190 for commercial, HIM.PA.103 for health insurance marketplace, and 
CP.PMN.16 for Medicaid; or  
2. If the requested use (e.g., diagnosis, age, dosing regimen)  is NOT specifically listed 
under section III (Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized)  AND CLINICAL POLICY   
Axitinib 
 
Page 4 of 7  
criterion 1 above does not apply, r efer to the off -label use policy for the relevant line 
of business : CP.CPA.09 for commercial, HIM.PA.154 for health insurance 
marketplace, and CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid.  
 
III. Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized:  
A. Non-FDA approved indications, which are not addressed in this policy, unless there is 
sufficie nt documentation of efficacy and safety according to the off label use policies –
CP.CPA.09 for commercial, HIM. PA.154 for health insurance marketplace , and 
CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid or evidence of coverage documents.  
 
IV. Appendices/General Information  
Appendix A: Abbreviation/Acronym Key DTC: differentiated thyroid carcinoma  
FDA: Food and Drug Association NCCN: National Comprehensive Cancer Network  
RCC: renal cell carcinoma 
 Appendix B : Therapeutic Alternatives   
This table provides a listing of preferred alternative therapy recommended in the approval criteria. The drugs listed here may not be a formulary agent and may require prior authorization.   
Drug Name   Dosing Regimen  Dose Limit/  
Maximum Dose  
DTC  
Lenvima (lenvatinib)  24 mg PO QD  24 mg/day  
Nexavar (sorafenib)  400 mg PO QD  400 mg/day  
Therapeutic alternatives are listed as Brand name® (generic) when the drug is available by brand name only 
and generic (Brand name®) when the drug is available by both brand and generic.  
 
Appendix C: Contraindications/Boxed Warnings 
None reported  
 
V. Dosage and A dministration   
Indication  Dosing Regimen  Maximum Dose  
RCC  Single -agent therapy  
• 5 mg PO BID  
 Combination therapy: 
• 5 mg PO  BID  with avelumab 800 mg every 2 weeks. 
• 5 mg PO BID  with pembrolizumab 200 mg every 3 
weeks or 400 mg every 6 weeks.  20 mg/day  
 
VI. Product Availability   
Tablets: 1  mg, 5 mg  
 CLINICAL POLICY   
Axitinib 
 
Page 5 of 7  
VII. References  
1. Inlyta Prescribing Information. New York, NY: Pfizer Labs, Inc.; September 2022. Available 
at https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2022/202324Orig1s014CorrectedLbl.pdf. Accessed October 24 , 2022. 
2. National Comprehensive Cancer Network Drugs and Biologics Compendium. Available at: nccn .org. Accessed October 24, 2022. 
3. National Comprehensive Cancer Network  Guidelines . Kidney Cancer Version 3.2023. 
Available at : nccn .org. Accessed October 24, 2022.  
4. National Comprehensive Cancer Network Guidelines. Thyroid Carcinoma Version 2.2022. Available at : nccn .org. Accessed October 24, 2022.  
5. Clinical Pharmacology [database online]. Tampa, FL: Gold Standard, Inc. Updated periodically . Accessed October 24, 2022. 
 
Reviews, Revisions, and Approvals  Date  P&T 
Approval 
Date  
1Q 2019 annual review; HIM line of business added; commercial 
approval duration changed from LOB or disease progression to LOB; thyroid carcinoma - DTC is added to diagnosis for clarity, metastatic/iodine refractory is removed and a drug trial is added  per 
NCCN ; references reviewed and updated.  11.13.18  02.19  
1Q 2020 annual review: for RCC with clear cell histology added 
additional approval pathway for concurrent use with Keytruda or Bavencio consistent with NCCN Compendium; references reviewed 
and updated.  10.24.19  02.20  
1Q 2021 annual review: oral oncology generic redirection lang uage 
added; for RCC, relapsed, stage IV, or metastatic disease added, clear cell histology restriction limited to combination therapy with Keytruda and Bavencio, single-agent first -line therapy added per NCCN; f or 
thyroid carcinoma, persistent disease added per NCCN ; references to 
HIM.PHAR.21 revised to HIM.PA.154; references reviewed and 
updated.  11.14.20  02.21  
1Q 202 2 annual review:  no significant changes;  clarified oral oncology 
generic redirection language to “must use”; references reviewed and 
update d.  11.09.21  02.22  
Revised approval duration for Commercial line of business from length 
of benefit to 12 months or duration of request, whichever is less  01.20.22  05.22  
Template changes applied to other diagnoses/indications.  09.29.22   
1Q 202 3 annual review:  Per NCCN Compendium for thyroid 
carcinoma added requirement that disease is not amenable to 
radioactive iodine therapy, added off -label indication of a lveolar s oft 
part sarcoma ; references reviewed and updated.  10.24.22  02.23  
 CLINICAL POLICY   
Axitinib 
 
Page 6 of 7  
Important R eminder 
This clinical polic y has been developed by appropriately experienced and licensed health care 
professionals based on a review and consideration of currently available generally accepted 
standards of medical practice; peer -reviewed medical literature; government agency/program  
approval status; evidence -based guidelines and positions of leading national health professional 
organizations; views of physicians practicing in relevant clinical areas affected by this clinical policy; and other available clinical information. The Healt h Plan  makes no representations and 
accepts no liability with respect to the content of any external information used or relied upon in developing this clinical policy. This clinical policy is consistent with standards of medical practice current at the ti me that this clinical policy was approved. “Health Plan” means a health 
plan that has adopted this clinical policy and that is operated or administered, in whole or in part, by Centene Management Company, LLC, or any of such health plan’s affiliates, as applicable.  
 The purpose of this clinical policy is to provide a guide to medical necessity, which is a component of the guidelines used to assist in making coverage decisions and administering benefits. It does not constitute a contract or guarantee regardi ng payment or results. Coverage 
decisions and the administration of benefits are subject to all terms, conditions, exclusions and limitations of the coverage documents (e.g., evidence of coverage, certificate of coverage, policy, contract of insurance, etc .), as well as to state and federal requirements and applicable Health 
Plan-level administrative policies and procedures.  
 This clinical policy is effective as of the date determined by the Health Plan. The date of posting may not be the effective date of this clinical policy. This clinical policy may be subject to applicable legal and regulatory requirements relating to provider notification. If there is a discrepancy between the effective date of this clinical policy and any applicable legal or regulatory requirement, the requirements of law and regulation shall govern. The Health Plan 
retains the right to change, amend or withdraw this clinical policy, and additional clinical policies may be developed and adopted as needed, at any time.  This clinical policy does not constitute medical advice, medical treatment or medical care.  It is not intended to dictate to providers how to practice medicine. Providers are expected to exercise professional medical judgment in providing the most appropriate care, and ar e solely responsible 
for the medical advice and treatment of members.  This clinical policy is not intended to recommend treatment for members. Members should consult with their treating physician in connection with diagnosis and treatment decisions.   Providers referred to in this clinical policy are independent contractors who exercise independent 
judgment and over whom the Health Plan has no control or right of control.  Providers are not agents or employees of the Health Plan.  
 This clinical policy is the property of the Health Plan . Unauthorized copying, use, and 
distribution of this clinical policy or any information contained herein are strictly prohibited.  Providers, members and their representatives are bound to the terms and conditions expressed herein through the terms of their contracts.  Where no such contract exists, providers, members CLINICAL POLICY   
Axitinib 
 
Page 7 of 7  
and their representatives agree to be bound by such terms and conditions by providing services to 
members and/or submitting claims for payment for such services.  
 Note:  
For Medicaid members , when state Medicaid coverage provisions conflict with the coverage 
provisions in this clinical policy, state Medicaid coverage provisions take precedence. Please refer to the state Medicaid manual for any coverage provisions pertaining to this clinical policy.  
 ©2012 Centene Corporation. All  rights reserved.  All materials are exclusively owned by 
Centene Corporation and are protected by United States copyright law and international copyright law.  No part of this publication may be reproduced, copied, modified, distributed, displayed, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted in any form or by any means, or otherwise published without the prior written permission of Centene Corporation. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice contained herein. Centene
® and Centene  
Corporation® are registered trademarks exclusively owned by Centene Corporation. 