     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
            
 
     
         
  
  
        
 
 
   
      
          
 
 
         
       
 
    
 Vocal  Cord  Paralysis  /  Insufficiency  Treatments  - Page 1 of 53 
Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency
Treatments 
POLICY  HISTORY  
Last Review: 02/24/2022 
Effective:  05/26/1998 
Next Review: 02/23/2023 Number: 0253 
*Please see amendment for Pennsylvania Medicaid at the end of this CPB. 
I. Aetna considers injections of bulking agents medically necessary 
for members with unilateral vocal cord paralysis using agents that 
are cleared by the Food and Drug Administration for this 
indication. This procedure has been shown to improve vocal 
quality and prevent recurrent aspirati on pneumonia in individuals 
with unilateral vocal cord paralysis. 
Aetna considers injections of bulking agents into the vocal cords experimental and investigational for all other indications because 
their eﬀectiveness for indications other than the one listed above 
has not been established. 
II. Aetna considers medialization thyroplasty (also known as type 1 
thyroplasty) medically necessary for vocal cord paralysis. A Gore 
Tex/silastic implant is considered medically necessary for this 
indication.             
 
        
   
 
   
        
 
   
       
 
        
 
  
 
 
 
       
 
 
       
   
  
 
 
   
          
 
        
 
  Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 2 of 53 
III. Aetna considers steroid injection after microsurgical removal of 
vocal fold lesions medically necessary for reduction of
 
postoperative   inﬂammation  and  scar  formation.   
IV. Aetna considers Radiesse (calcium hydroxylapatatite and
 
hyaluronic acid gel) medically necessary for the treatment of 
permanent  vocal cord   paralysis/insuﬃciency.   
V. Aetna considers harvesting and injection of autologous
 fat medically necessary for the treatment of vocal cord
 
paralysis/insuﬃciency.  
VI. Aetna considers injection of Cymetra (micronized AlloDerm tissue), 
or Restyl ane (cross- linked hyaluronic acid) medically necessary for 
the management of voice loss and aspiration in cases where unilateral vocal cord paralysis is anticipated to be short -term (e.g., 
in cases of post -thyroidectomy unilateral paralysis where the 
recur rent laryngeal nerve is known to be intact). 
VII. Aetna considers laryngeal electromyography (EMG) medically 
necessary for the evaluation of vocal fold paralysis. 
VIII. Aetna considers interarytenoid augmentation with an injectable 
ﬁller medically necessary for the management of posterior 
laryngeal clefts in infants if a 3 -month of conservative 
management (e.g., thickening of feeding) has failed. 
IX. Aetna considers botulinum toxin injection experimental and 
investigational for the treatment of vocal cord paralysis because its 
eﬀectiveness  for  this  indication  has  not  been  established.  See CPB  
0113 - Botulinum  Toxin  (../100_199/0113.html).  
X. Aetna considers Juvederm experimental and investigational for the 
treatment of  vocal  cord  paralysis  because   its  eﬀectiveness  for  this  
indication has not  been  established.  
XI. Aetna considers Radiesse injection f or the treatment of 
velopharyngeal/velopalatal insuﬃciency  experimental and   
investigational  because  its  eﬀectiveness  for  this  indication  has  not              
 
  
 
      
  
 
      
 
 
        
        
  
         
  
 
 
 
       
    
  
            
     
    
      
    
 
         
     
          
     
      
      
      
       Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 3 of 53 
been established. 
XII. Aetna considers Deﬂux (dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer) 
experimental and investigational for the treatment of 
velopharyngeal  insuﬃciency  because its  eﬀectiveness   for  this  
indication has not  been  established.  
XIII. Aetna considers posterior cricoarytenoideus re-innervation and 
pacing experimental and investigational for the treatment of bilateral vocal fold   paralysis  because   its  eﬀectiveness   for  this  
indication has not  been  established.  
XIV. Aetna considers injection of basic ﬁbroblast growth factor 
experimental and investigational for the treatment of vocal fold 
lesions (e.g., atrophy, scar, and sulcus) and vocal fold 
paralysis because its eﬀectiveness for these indications has not 
been established. 
Background 
The vocal cords, also known as vocal folds, are two bands of flexible tissue located within the larynx (voice box) at the top of the trachea 
(windpipe). They are open during inhalation and close during swallowing and phonation (producing sound or speech). Closure of the vocal folds is 
imperative to protect the lower airway during swallowing. When closed, 
the vocal folds are able to vibrate and regulate the expelled airflow from the lungs to produce speech and singing. The rest of the time, they are relaxed in an open position, to allow for breathing. 
Abnormal functioning or impaired movement of the vocal folds is 
generally referred to as vocal cord dysfunction and may be caused by disease, injury or may be idiopathic (cause unknown). Symptoms of vocal 
cord dysfunction may include changes in voice (breathiness or 
hoarseness), repetitive throat clearing, coughing or difficulty swallowing. 
Dysphonia is a general descriptive term that encompasses any voice impairment, including the quality or volume of the sound, increased vocal effort, fatigue, pain or discomfort associated with speaking or singing.             
 
            
        
       
          
    
 
          
     
      
        
            
     
 
    
     
         
       
 
       
       
            
             
       
     
  
 
         
          
        
     
            
        
          
       
     
      
  
 Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 4 of 53 
Vocal fold mobility disorders are a type of vocal cord dysfunction involving 
decreased movement of one (unilateral) or both (bilateral) vocal cords. 
Vocal cord insufficiency (also called glottic insufficiency) is most often used to describe this condition. Other associated terms include vocal fold 
paresis, paralysis or weakness. 
Vocal cord insufficiency involves the incomplete closure of vocal cords 
and inappropriate escaping of air during phonation. Vocal folds are generall y classified as hypomobile or immobile until the condition persists 
beyond six months with no other mechanical explanation. After that time, the cause is assumed to be from a permanent neurological cause and the 
terms paralysis or paresis are used. 
Resting the voice is often the first conservative measure for individuals with symptoms indicative of vocal cord dysfunction. Voice (speech) therapy may also be recommended. Vocal cord paralysis determined to 
be bilateral or permanent generally requires surgical intervention. 
The recurrent laryngeal nerves of the vagus nerves are the primary 
innervators of the abductors and adductors of the vocal folds. Isolated 
injury of the recurrent laryngeal nerve results in paralysis of the vocal cord 
in the para- median position on one side, 2 to 3 mm lateral to the laryngeal 
midline. Combined injury of the recurrent and superior laryngeal nerves 
paralyzes the vocal cord in the intermediate position, several millimeters 
lateral to the para- median position. 
Vocal cord paralysis may be unilateral or bilateral, central or peripheral. Unilateral left vocal cord paralysis is most common. Less than 20 % of 
cases are bilateral. Thyroidectomy is by far the most common cause of 
bilateral vocal cord paralysis. Central causes i nclude brain stem and 
supranuclear lesions and account for only 5 % of all cases. Supranuclear 
or cortical causes of vocal cord paralysis are exceedingly rare, owing to the bilateral crossed neural innervation to the brain stem medullary 
centers in the nucleus ambiguus. The most frequent central cause is vascular insufficiency or a stroke affecting the brain stem. Congenital 
central lesions are usually secondary to Arnold- Chiari malformation or 
brain stem dysgenesis and are often associated with additional cranial neuropathies.             
 
       
     
    
      
     
       
          
    
        
  
 
        
          
     
          
        
       
  
 
        
     
     
      
      
     
           
     
   
         
        
   
 
       
           
          
           
       
     
      Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 5 of 53 
Most cases of peripheral vocal cord paralysis are secondary to 
thyroidectomy or non- laryngeal neoplasms, including bronchogenic, 
esophageal, and thyroid carcinoma. Other less common lesions causing 
paralysis of the vocal cord include tumors of the deep lobe of the parotid 
gland, carotid body tumors, glomus jugulare and vagale tumors, and 
neurogenic neoplasms of the tenth nerve and jugular foramen. External 
penetrating wounds to the neck or prolonged endotracheal intubation may 
also traumatize the recurrent laryngeal nerve, producing vocal cord paralysis. Finally, toxic neuropathy and idiopathic causes account for a 
few cases. 
In adults, unilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis generally 
produces hoarseness and a weak, breathy voice with varying amounts of 
aspiration. The normal vocal cord may cross the midline to approximate 
the paralyzed vocal cord in the para- median position. In children, varying 
degrees of inspiratory stridor may also be present. Bilateral vocal cord 
paralysis is commonly associated with inspiratory stridor, shortness of breath, and dyspnea on exertion. 
Injection laryngoplasty/injection augmentation of the vocal cords has been 
proposed as an alternative to conventional surgical insertion of a 
permanent synthetic implant lateral to the vocal fold (medialization 
laryngoplasty). Injection laryngoplasty is a purportedly less invasive, 
nonsurgical procedure to treat unilateral vocal cord insufficiency by temporarily adding volume or bulk to facilitate vocal fold closure. 
Substances proposed for injection include, but may not be limited to, the 
following: autologous fat; collagen or gelatin based bulking agent; skin/tissue substitute (micronized human acellular dermis 
[Cymetra]); soft tissue fillers including calcium hydroxyapatite gel (e.g., 
Prolaryn, Radiesse, VF Gel/Gel Plus), hyaluronic acid gel (e.g., 
Hyalaform, Restylane), and Teflon. 
Management of unilateral vocal cord paralysis due to lesions of the recurrent laryngeal nerve includes the injection of Teflon paste or Gelfoam 
under local anesthesia into the paralyzed vocal cord, mobilizing it 
medially. Medialization is valuable in the therapy of aspiration and results 
in dramatic improvement in voice quality. Other injection options for 
glottic insufficiency include bovine collagen, calcium hydroxylapatite, injectable fat, and Gelfoam. An assessment by the National Institute for             
 
           
    
       
      
   
       
   
     
    
  
 
      
        
   
 
     
           
         
         
      
     
 
            
    
      
    
    
    
      
          
    
           
     
 
 
     
          
     
    Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 6 of 53 
Clinical Excellence (NICE, 2005) concluded that there are no major safety 
concerns regarding collagen injections for vocal cord augmentation and 
that they provide short -term symptom relief. However, evidence on long­
term efficacy is lacking. Belafsky and Postma (2004) stated that initial 
experience with vocal fold augmentation using calcium hydroxylapatite is promising. However, its long -term safety and effectiveness needs to be 
established. Medialization of the paralyzed cord may also be 
accomplished externally via a thyroidotomy and placement of a Silastic wedge implant inside the thyroid cartilage in a small pocket deep to the 
paralyzed vocal cord. 
The upper airway obstruction caused by bilateral vocal cord paralysis 
usually requires a tracheostomy initially. Subsequent improvement in the 
airway can be obtained with an arytenoidectomy. 
Cymetra (micronized AlloDerm tissue) has been studied for soft tissue augmentation. In a preliminary report on voice quality as well as quality ­
of-life following Cymetra injection laryngoplasty in patients with unilateral 
vocal cord paralysis (n = 14), Pearl et al (2002) stated that Cymetra appears to be a safe new material that is suitable for injection laryngoplasty. However, long- term results are pending. 
In a study with 10 patients with breathy dysphonia caused by unilateral 
vocal fold paralysis, Karpenko and colleagues (2003) examined the effectiveness of transoral injection of Cymetra for this indication. Each 
patient underwent pre- operative and post -operative acoustic analysis, 
aerodynamic measures, taped voice sampling, and videostroboscopy. Significant improvements were identified in maximum phonation time, relative glottal area, and subjective judgment of glottal competency. However, these results were not maintained at the 3-month study 
interval. No significant change in quantitative or subjective voice quality 
was noted for the study group during the investigation. The investigators 
stated that resorption of Cymetra may play a significant role in 
contributing to these findings. 
Milstein and colleagues (2005) noted micronized Alloderm (Cymetra) is a 
relatively new product used for vocal fold augmentation. Previous studies 
evaluating possible long- term effectiveness of this product have shown 
mixed results. These investigators re- assessed possible long- term             
 
      
   
        
         
           
     
         
      
   
           
    
     
       
       
       
    
      
          
      
       
 
      
      
     
          
    
        
   
     
   
        
    
      
    
    
      
        Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 7 of 53 
results of Cymetra injection laryngoplasty (IL) in patients with unilateral 
vocal fold paralysis (UVFP). Pre-operative voice samples and 
videostroboscopic findings were compared with the most recently 
available post- operative data to assess effectiveness of the procedure. A 
panel of voice experts analyzed both vocal and vibratory function in these 
samples. In addition, pre- and post- operative voice- related quality of life 
measures and patients' self-ratings of voice outcomes were compared. A 
total of 20 patients (7 males, 13 females; 14 with left -sided paralysis, 6 
with right- sided paralysis) were identified in the study population. 
Cymetra injection was performed an average of 45.1 months after onset 
of vocal fold paralysis, and average follow -up post -injection was 11.2 
months. Comparing pre- and post- operative measures, voice quality (p < 
0.0001), glottal closure (p < 0.0001), and degree of vocal fold bowing (p < 0.0001) were all improved by injection. Quality of life measures and 
patients' self -perceptions of vocal quality were also improved (p < 0.01). 
Fifteen (75 %) patients showed long- lasting results; 8 patients showed 
improvement for more than 12 months after injection. The authors concluded that Cymetra IL offers improved vocal and vibratory function to 
patients with UVFP. The benefits of such medialization may be longer 
lasting than previously reported; and further long- term study is needed. 
Tirado et al (2010) reviewed the clinical results of off ice-based injection 
laryngoplasty with 2 different therapeutic materials in patients with vocal 
fold paralysis and history of radiation therapy to the larynx. These 
investigators performed chart review of 11 patients who underwent office-
based injection laryngoplasty with calcium hydroxylapatite or micronized Alloderm. All patients had a history of radiation therapy to the neck, with 
the larynx included in the radiation field. Voice analyses, clinical 
outcomes, and complications were reviewed. Effectivenes s of the 
procedure was evaluated by comparing pre- and post- injection mean 
phonation time (MPT) results from voice analysis data. A total of 15 injections were performed in 11 patients with vocal fold paralysis (1 female, 10 males; mean age of 62 years). Data from voice analyses 
before and after the procedure were available for 9 injections. The MPT 
was significantly increased among patients undergoing the procedure (p 
< 0.05). All procedures were successful, and only 1 self -limited 
complication was reported. The authors concluded that office- based             
 
         
      
  
 
        
    
    
      
     
       
      
   
      
     
         
     
          
     
       
    
      
     
     
 
        
   
      
     
   
   
     
        
      
       
   
           
        
     Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 8 of 53 
injection laryngoplasty is a safe procedure with acceptable clinical results 
in patients with vocal fold paralysis who have a history of radiation 
therapy to the larynx. 
Aviso et al (2010) stated that IL is a temporary intervention for UVFP. 
Injection laryngoplasty is often performed in patients with a potentially recoverable recurrent laryngeal nerve insult while awaiting spontaneous 
recovery, compensation, or definitive intervention. These researchers 
investigated the long- term outcomes of subjects treated with an IL. A 
single -institution, retrospective review was performed from January 2004 
to July 2008; subjects with potentially recoverable UVFP who underwent an IL were included. The following etiologies were noted for the 42 
subjects included: idiopathic in 13 (31 %), iatrogenic in 25 (60 %), 
infectious in 2 (5 %), traumatic in 1 (2 %), and stroke in 1 (2 %). Ten 
subjects (24 %) had full recovery of their paralysis, 4 (10 %) partially recovered movement with adequate recovery of voice, 16 (40 %) had no 
recovery of motion but compensation with adequate recovery of voice, 12 
(29 %) required further definitive intervention in the form of laryngeal framework surgery. Voice -related quality of life scores improved for all 
patients surveyed after IL and improved more for those who ultimately recovered or compensated. The authors concluded that the majority of 
subjects with potentially recoverable UVFP recover vocal fold motion 
and/or adequate voice after IL without permanent intervention. 
Prendes et al (2012) noted that that patients with UVFP treated with temporary IL have a decreased rate of permanent medialization laryngoplasty (ML) compared to UVFP patients initially treated by 
observation. These researchers examined if the lower rate of ML 
corresponded with improved quantifiable measures. Examinations at 
presentation and follow -up of 14 IL patients and 24 observation patients 
were analyzed for laryngoscopic features and Consensus A uditory -
Perceptual Evaluation of Voice (CAPE- V) scores. The groups were 
similar at presentation. At follow -up, the IL group showed significant 
improvement in 11/18 laryngoscopic criteria and 7/12 CAPE- V 
parameters compared to the observation group (p < 0. 05). The 
observation group underwent ML more frequently than the IL group (75 % 
versus 29 %, p = 0.008). The authors concluded that the lower rate of permanent ML in patients undergoing temporary IL corresponds with             
 
    
         
  
 
    
       
    
    
     
     
     
  
    
    
      
     
      
      
       
    
            
     
     
        
   
 
     
       
 
  
 
   
     
             
   
      Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 9 of 53 
improvements in CAPE -V scores and laryngoscopic features, and 
improvements persisted beyond the accepted time frame for temporary 
graft resorption. 
Lee and colleagues (2010) investigated the effectiveness of IL in the 
management of post -thyroidectomy vocal cord paralysis (VCP). From 
March 2005 to December 2008, a total of 174 consecutive injection 
laryngoplasties were performed in patients with unilateral glottic 
insufficiency. This included 34 patients with post -thyroidectomy VCP: 15 
with temporary VCP and 19 with permanent VCP. Percutaneous injection was performed under local anesthesia into the vocalis muscle, using 
disposable 25G -long needles through the cricothyroid membrane or 
directly through the thyroid cartilage. Patients completed the acoustic, 
aerodynamic, perceptual, stroboscopic, and voice handicap index 
evaluations before and at 3 and 6 months after the injection. All IL could be performed under local anesthesia without morbidity. Acoustic and 
perceptual parameters (overall grade of hoarseness, roughness, 
breat hiness, asthenia, and strain), maximum phonation time, jitter, and 
shimmer, voice handicap index, and grades of mucosal waves and glottic closure were significantly improved after the injection and they remained stable over 6 months in both the temporary VCP and permanent groups 
(p < 0.05). The authors concluded that based on these results, IL improved the voice, and voice- related quality of life in patients with post ­
thyroidectomy VCP. It is a simple, safe, and useful method for 
rehabilitating post -thyroi dectomy VCP patients. 
Lau et al (2010) (i) determined the correlation between voice handicap 
index and quantitative videostroboscopy for patients undergoing IL 
for UVFP; and (ii) evaluated which videostroboscopy measurements 
correlate best with voice hand icap index in patients demonstrating 
progressive improvement beyond 6 months following IL. Patients 
underwent outpatient injection laryngoplasty with hyaluronic acid between 
2005 and 2007. A total of 28 patients were assessed pre- operatively and 
post- operatively using voice handicap index and videostroboscopy. 
Various videostroboscopy measurements were quantified: glottic open 
area (ratio of open to total glottic area during closed phase of phonation), 
glottic closed phase (frame ratio of closed phase to total glottic cycle), supraglottic compression (percent encroachment of supraglottis onto             
 
         
   
     
       
  
  
      
             
      
       
    
      
       
           
    
          
  
 
 
     
       
           
      
       
     
  
      
      
     
    
     
      
      
       
            
     
      Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 10 of 53 
best- fit ellipse around glottis), wave amplitude (difference in glottic open 
area between open and closed phases), and wave duration (number of 
frames per glottic cycle). Correlation coefficients were calculated using Spearman's r. A total of 117 separate recordings were analyzed. 
Correlation coefficients between voice handicap index (normalized to 
preoperative values) and glottic closed phase showed moderate- strong 
correlation (r = -0.733, p < 0.001), while glottic open area and wave 
duration showed weak -moderate correlation (r = 0.465, p < 0.001 and r = 
-0.404, p < 0.001 respectively). Other parameters showed poor 
correlation. A subset of 25 recordings from 8 patients with progressive 
voice handicap index improvement beyond 6 months showed highest correlation with supraglottic compression (r = 0.504, p < 0.05). The 
authors concluded that voice handicap index correlates best with glottic closed phase, suggesting duration of vocal fold closure during the glottic 
cycle best represents patients' subjective outcome post -procedure. 
Progressive improvement in voice handicap index beyond 6 months may 
relate to gradual reduction in compensatory supraglottic compression, with 
moderate correlation. 
Reiter and Brosch (2012) noted that augmentation of vocal fold with 
hyaluronic acid (Restylane) is used as a therapeutic option for insufficient glottic closure in UVFP. Analysis of the optimal glottic width, effectiveness 
(long- term voice improvement as a consequence of longevity of 
Restylane), and safety of this new method was made. In a prospective 
clinical cohort study, 19 consecutive patients with UVFP who received vocal fold augmentation with Restylane were examined pre- operatively; 6 
weeks, 6 months, and 12 months post -operatively by laryngostroboscopy; 
and their voice was evaluated by subjective, objective, and self -
assessment (Voice Handicap Index). In 11 of 19 (58 %) patients, a subjective ly and objectively acceptable voice quality was observed in a 
follow -up of 12 months; 8 of 19 (42 %) patients had a considerable 
impairment of the voice after 6 weeks (range of 1 to 24 weeks). 
Therefore, another intervention (e.g., IL or thyroplasty) was 
recommended. An impairment of voice was mainly observed if the pre­
operative glottal gap during phonation was more than 1 mm. The authors 
concluded that a long duration (up to 12 months) of acceptable quality of voice was achieved by augmentation with Restylane, if the glottal gap             
 
      
         
         
 
    
     
     
          
       
        
     
        
       
        
   
 
    
        
    
     
       
     
        
        
        
   
 
          
        
     
    Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 11 of 53 
was 1 mm or less videolaryngostroboscopically during phonation. The 
authors recommend this therapy for temporary voice improvement and to 
augment vocal therapy, if spontaneous recovery of voice is likely. 
Verma and Dailey (2014) stated that office- based injection laryngoplasty 
(OBIL) is a common method of addressing glottal insufficiency. These 
investigators identified the demographics, laterality, technique, success 
rate, injectates, and complications of OBIL performed over a 3-year 
period at a single institution. All OBILs performed for the management of 
UVFP by the senior author over 3 years (2007 to 2009) were identified from billing records. The age, gender, laterality, underlying disease 
process, augmentation material, route of injection, and complications 
were recorded. A total of 82 OBILs were attempted on 57 patients. The 
most common route of access was transoral (85.6 %). All OBILs were able to be completed. Injectates used were hyalur onic acid derivatives 
(57.3  %),  calciu
 m  hydroxyapatite  (16  %),  and  Cymetra  (16.5  %).  A  total  
of  3  complications  (3.7  %) occurred;  30  %  of  patients  ultimately  elected 
for  thyroplasty  or  ansa reinnervation,  22 %  found their  condition to self - 
resolve,  14 %  died,  and 25 %  were lost  to follow -up.  The authors  
concluded that  using a variety  of  approaches,  OBIL is  possible in almost  
all  patients.  The single surgeon transoral  route using a rigid angled 
telescope and curved injection needle was  the most  commonly  used 
approach.  Multiple injectates  can be used and have good safety  records.  
Further
more, an UpToDate review on “Hoarseness in adults” (Bruch and 
Kamani, 2015) states that “Unilateral paralysis – Surgical procedures are 
available for unilateral fold paralysis to reposition (medialize) the immobile 
vocal fold in order to achieve adequate glottal closure and improve voice 
as well as swallowing and cough. Techniques include transoral or transcervical injection (injection laryngoplasty) of permanent or resorbable material, such as autologous fat, collagen, hyaluronic acid, or hydroxylapatite, lateral to the vocal fold. Medialization thyroplasty 
involves transcervical placement of an implant (usually silicone or Gortex) through a surgically created window in the thyroid cartilage”. 
Rees and colleagues (2008) reviewed the clinical results of the thyrohyoid 
approach for in-office vocal fold augmentation with calcium 
hydroxylapatite (CaHA/Radiesse). The charts of all patients who 
underwent in- office thyrohyoid vocal fold augmentation between June 1,             
 
     
      
        
      
     
        
      
    
       
     
   
      
    
           
  
 
        
       
    
         
      
      
    
        
     
     
 
         
     
       
     
            Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 12 of 53 
2005 and June 1, 2007 were reviewed. Information with respect to 
patient demographics, indications, complications, and clinical outcome 
was abstracted. A total of 51 thyrohyoid vocal fold augmentations were performed in 33 patients (26 men; mean age of 66 years). Six (13 %) 
procedures were aborted as a result of an inability to achieve an appropriate injection angle. Two (6 %) self-limited complications included 
a vasovagal episode and a small ulcer near the petiole of the epiglottis. 
Pre-and post- procedure data were available for 62.5 %. The mean 10­
item Voice Handicap Index (VHI) improved from 27.9 (+/ -8.40) pre­
procedure to 13.5 (+/ -10.52) post- procedure (p < 0.001). The authors 
conc luded that in- office vocal fold augmentation with the use of the 
thyrohyoid approach demonstrates excellent clinical results. It has become these investigators' technique of choice for vocal fold medialization with the patient under local anesthesia in the office setting. 
Complications are rare. 
Rosen et al (2009) evaluated the long- term 
 effectiveness of CaHA vocal 
fold injection for patients with glottal insufficiency. Each patient served as his/her own control. Voice -related outcome measures were collected for 
pre-injection, 1, 3, 6, and 12 months. A total of 63 patients were available 
for evaluation; 53 % of the injection procedures were done in the office 
and 57 % of patients were diagnosed with unilateral paralysis and 43 % with glottal incompetence with mobile vocal folds. Patient satisfaction 12 months after injection showed 67 % reporting a significant improvement in 
voice and 81 % reporting at least a moderate improvement in voice. 
Utilizing the VHI -10, visual analog scale (vocal effort), Consensus 
Assessment  Perceptual  Evaluation V  (judgments  of  voice severity),  and 
objective  voice  measures  of  glottal  closure  (maximum  phonation  time  and 
S:Z  ratio),  paired- t  tests  showed significant  improvements  after  
treatment.  A  22  %  further  treatment  rate  was  found  at  the  12-month  time 
point.  The authors  concluded that  1-year  results  in this  large cohort  of  
patients  with glottal  incompetence treated with CaHA  vocal  fold injection 
demonstrate that  excellent  clinical  results  were achieved.  
In a mult
i-institutional retrospective review, Sulica et al (2010) identified 
contemporary indications, treatment principles, technique, injection 
materials, complications, and success rates of vocal fold injection augmentation. Records of patients undergoing injection augmentation 
at 7 university medical centers from July 2007 through June 2008 were             
 
     
        
      
     
      
        
         
             
           
         
      
        
  
         
    
     
      
      
     
      
    
     
     
   
 
            
       
      
        
    
 
 
    
    
    
        
          
             
      Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 13 of 53 
reviewed for information regarding diagnosis, unilateral or bilateral injection, route of injection, anesthesia, treatment site (office or operating 
room), material used, reason for technique selected, and technical success. In 12 months, 460 injections were performed, 236 (51 %) in 
awake, unsedated patients, and 224 (49 %) under general anesthesia. Indications included vocal fold paralysis (248; 54 %), paresis (97; 21 %), atrophy (68; 15 %) and scar (47; 10 %). Scar was more likely to be 
treated in the operating room (p = 0.000052). In awake patients, 112 (47 
%) injections were performed by transcricothyroid approach, 55 (23 %) by 
peroral approach, 49 (21 %) by trans -thyrohyoid membrane approach, 
and 20 (8 %) by trans -thyroid cartilage approach. Neither technical 
success rate (99 % versus 97 %) nor complication rate (3 % versus 2 %) differed between awake and asleep techniques. The most common 
materials in the clinic setting were methylcellulose (35 %), bovine 
collagen (28 %), and CaHA (26 %); in the operating room these were CaHA (36 %) and methylcellulose (35 %). Calcium hydroxylapatite was more likely to be used under general anesthesia (p = 0.019). Five-year 
data show that the use of injection in the awake patient rose from 11 % to 
43 % from 2003 to 2008. The authors concluded that injection 
augmentation remains a safe, effective, and clinically practical treatment 
with a high rate of success, whether performed in the awake or asleep patient. The rapid adoption of awake injection over the past 5 years speaks to its clinical utility. Complication rates are low and equivalent to 
those under general anesthesia. 
Medialization thyroplasty (MT), also known as type 1 thyroplasty, is one of 
the several surgical procedures that are employed for the treatment of unilateral vocal fold paralysis (UVFP). It entails the trans -cervical 
placement of an implant through a surgically created window in the 
thyroid cartilage to achieve medialization of the vocal fold so that better closure can be achieved. 
Laccourreye and colleagues (2005) documented the long- term results 
achieved with the Montgomery implant in 96 patients with a unilateral laryngeal nerve paralysis (ULNP). Data regarding morbidity and 
functional results were obtained at regular visits to the clinic. All patients 
were followed for a minimum of 6 months or until death. A total of 42 patients had a minimum of 12 months of follow -up. Early in the study, 36 
patients were prospectively recorded under similar conditions before             
 
           
   
     
        
      
      
       
         
   
   
     
     
   
 
       
     
     
           
   
        
   
      
     
     
    
        
       
             
      
         
        
  
 
          
        
          
    
      Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 14 of 53 
placement of the Montgomery implant and at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months post ­
operatively. None of the 96 patients died in the immediate post- operative 
period. The peri -operative course was unremarkable in 94.8 % of cases. 
Peri-operative problems included failure to obtain a satisfactory phonatory 
result in 3 patients, difficulty to stabilize the implant posteriorly in 1 
patient, and fracture of the inferior rim of the thyroid cartilage window in another patient. The primary immediate post- operative problem (within 
the first post- operative month) was laryngeal dyspnea, noted in 4 
patients. According to the patient's subjective assessment, speech and 
voice was always improved in the immediate post -operative period. 
However, 3 patients had secondary degradation of speech and voice. 
Revision surgery under local anesthesia resulted in a 97.9 % ultimate 
speech and voice success rate. According to the patient's subjective 
assessment, adequate swallowing in the immediate post -operative period 
was achieved in 94.2 % of cases that had swallowing problems pre­operatively. A significant statistical increase in the duration parameters (phonation time, phrase grouping, speech rate) together with a statistical 
significant decrease in both the jitter and shimmer values was noted when 
comparing the pre- operative and the post -operative values at 1 month. 
Analysis of the evolution of the speech and voice parameters at 1, 3, 6, 
and 12 months post -operatively showed a significant decrease in the 
fundamental frequency and noise- to-harmonic ratio values but did not 
demonstrate any significant differences for the other speech and voice parameters. The authors concluded that type I thyroplasty with 
Montgomery implant insertion is a safe and reproducible method to treat ULNP. Furthermore, this system achieves very good and stable 
phonatory results. Finally, the use of this technique and implant sy stem 
appears safe in patients from various cultures with ULNP from a variety of 
causes and severe comorbidity. Over the past decade at the authors' department, this procedure progressively replaced the use of the 
intra- cordal injection of autologous fat injection that was initially 
advocated in patients with ULNP. 
Lam et al (2007) reported on the use of MT in patients (n = 87) 
with symptomatic cancer -related UVFP. There were no significant 
differences between the cancer -related and benign groups in terms of the 
speech and swallowing rehabilitation outcome and the peri -operative 
complication rate (p > 0.05). The median survival time of cancer -related 
UVFP patients from the date of medialization to death was 129 days.             
 
        
     
           
  
    
 
          
         
          
   
       
    
   
       
     
        
       
     
     
         
         
       
     
    
     
  
 
      
       
    
   
   
      
      
         
   
    
    
      Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 15 of 53 
Age greater than 65 years was identified as the only factor for a shorter 
survival period after medialization (p = 0.040). The authors concluded that MT restores satisfactory speech and swallowing and has  a low peri ­
operative complication rate in patients with cancer -related UVFP. 
Furthermore, post -medialization survival period was also reasonable. 
In a prospective observational cohort study, Storck and associates (2007) 
assessed functional results of MT using a hydroxyapatite implant 
(VoCoM) for the treatment of UVFP. A total of 26 patients (19 men, 7 
women) were enrolled in the study. To evaluate voice function, the following parameters were measured pre-operatively and post­
operatively: mean fundamental frequency, mean sound pressure level, frequency and amplitude range (voice range profile), and maximum phonation time. A perceptual assessment of hoarseness was conducted 
using the Roughness, Breathiness, Hoarseness scale. Furthermore, the magnitude of voice related impairment of the patient's communication 
skills was rated on a 7- point scale. A combined parameter called the 
Voice Dysfunction Index (VDI) was used to rate vocal performance. All 
patients showed a statistically significant improvement in the VDI, in perceptual voice analysis, in maximum phonation time, and in the 
dynamic range of voice. One patient experienced a post- operative wound 
hemorrhage as a minor complication. No further complications or implant 
extrusions were observed. The authors concluded that MT using a 
hydroxyapatite implant is a secure and efficient phono- surgical 
procedure. Voice quality and patient satisfaction improve significantly 
after treatment. 
Chrobok et al (2008) implemented MT with a customized silicone implant 
in a total of 43 operations (36 patients). In 5 of these patients, the MT was combined with cricothyroid subluxation (3 cases) or adduction of 
arytenoid cartilage (3 cases). One patient received MT, cricothyroid 
subluxation and adduction of arytenoid cartilage. Post- operatively, 36 
patients reported substantial reduction of their complaints, 5 patients found their voice improved and only 2 patients (5.6 %) stated that their voice had not changed. The subjective evaluation was consistent with 
the findings of laryngoscopy and the pre- operative and post -operative 
phonat ion parameters (maximum phonation time, maximum sound 
pressure level, jitter and shimmer). Average maximum phonation time was 6.5 seconds before surgery and 12.5 seconds after surgery.             
 
            
 
         
        
         
   
     
      
     
       
       
      
    
       
         
   
     
       
        
        
      
 
     
         
     
        
      
         
      
        
   
          
          Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 16 of 53 
Maximum vocal sound pressure level was, on average, about 4 dB higher 
after  surgery.  Jitter  was  reduced from  5.3 %  to 3.7 %  and shimmer  from  
32.3 %  to 18.6 %.  The differences  between pre- surgical and post - 
surgical  parameters  in  this  study  were  all  statistically  significant,  indicating 
voice improv ement.  The  authors  concluded  that  MT  with  a  silicone 
implant  was  proven to be a successful  and safe surgical  method for  the 
treatment  of  vocal  fold paralysis.  
Dursun and co-workers (2008) examined the early and long- term 
functional results of type I thyroplasty and injection laryngoplasty using fat 
or calcium hydroxylapatite. A total of 30 patients with glottic insufficiency 
were included and followed- up between 1 to 7 years. Patients with glottic 
bowing or sulcus vocalis were selected for injection augmentation of the 
vocal folds, while those with UVFP underwent MT. Perceptual and 
acoustic analysis of voice, and videolaryngostroboscopy were performed before and after surgery. After the surgery, GRBAS (grade, rough, 
breathy, asthenic, strained) scale (where 0 = normal, 1 = mild, 2 = 
moderate and 3 = severe) of all patients demonstrated significant change in grade of severity, roughness, and breathiness. Acoustic analysis 
showed significant change in fundamental frequency (Fo), jitter, shimmer, 
noise to harmonic ratio, and maximum phonation time (MPT) in 
thyroplasty group, while those demonstrated significant change in Fo 
(lowest) and jitter, and MPT in injection augmentation group. The authors concluded that MT is the gold standard for the management of glottic 
insufficiency, regardless of the severity of glottic gap. However, injection 
augmentation of the vocal folds may be considered as an alternative in 
the treatment of patients with small glottic gap. 
Broniatowski and colleagues (2010) examined if respiratory compromise from bilateral vocal fold impairment (paralysis) can be objectively 
alleviated by re- innervation and pacing. A patient with paramedian vocal 
folds and synkinesis had a tracheotomy for stridor after bilateral laryngeal nerve injury and Miller Fisher syndrome. One posterior cricoarytenoideus 
(PCA) received a nerve- muscle pedicle fitted with a perineural electrode 
for pacemaker stimulation. The airway was evaluated endoscopically and by spirometry for up to 1 year. Bilateral vocal fold patency during quiet 
breathing was reversed to active vocal fold adduction during tracheal 
occlusion. Peak inspiratory flows were significantly higher (p < 0.001) 
after re- innervation. Peak inspiratory flows as well as glottic apertures             
 
     
    
         
     
    
 
      
       
      
   
   
        
      
      
         
      
 
       
      
      
         
      
    
         
      
       
    
   
      
            
    
    Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 17 of 53 
increased further under stimulation (42 Hz, 1 to 4 mA, 42 to 400 
microsec); although the differences were insignificant. The authors 
concluded that based on these preliminary data, PCA re-innervation and 
pacing offer promise for amelioration of respiratory compromise after 
paradoxical adduction in bilateral vocal fold paralysis. 
Fang et al (2010) analyzed outcomes following fat injection laryngoplasty 
in pat
ients with unilateral vocal cord paralysis. A total of 33 consecutive 
patients with unilateral vocal cord paralysis undergoing autologous fat 
injection laryngoplasty with pre- operative and serial post -operative follow -
up were included in this analysis. Main outcome measures were voice 
laboratory measurements, Voice Outcome Survey, and 36-item Short 
Form Health Survey. Except for the physical functioning dimension of 
global health, voice- related subjective outcomes and acoustic variables of 
the patients significantly improved after surgery (p < 0.05). Compared 
with population norms, the mean (SD) scores of patients were inferior on the 36- item  Short  Form  Health Survey  dimensions  of  physical  functioning 
(80.7 [22.3]  versus  90.2 [17.4])  and role functioning- physical  problems  
(65.0  [36.2]  versus  80.2  [36.2]).  Overall,  88.9  %  (24  of  27)  of  the  patients  
were satisfied with their  surgery.  The authors  concluded that  fat  injection 
laryngoplasty  seems  to be effective in enhancing acoustic  and quality  of  
life  outcomes  in  patients  with  unilateral  vocal  cord  paralysis.  The  effect  is 
sustainable over  12 months.  
Zhang et al 
(2011) evaluated the effect of combination of autologous 
fascia and fat injection into vocal fold for the treatment of patients with unilateral vocal fold paralysis and observed the long- term effectiveness of 
this procedure. A total of 26 unilateral vocal fold paralysis patients underwent vocal fold injection under general anesthesia, meanwhile, the mucosa of the injected point was sutured through laryngoscope under direct vision. There were 6 patients underwent autologous fat injection 
into vocal fold (group A), and 20 patients underwent autologous anterior 
rectus sheath fascia and fat injection (group B). Therapeutic efficacy 
were evaluated by videostroboscopy, voice- related parameters analysis 
and voice evaluation before and after treatment. Clinical analysis of this 
procedure was retrospectively performed in this serial of patients. All 
patients were followed- up for 24 months. On the third day after operation, 
there was an acute inflammatory reaction induced by the graft. This 
reaction disappeared 3 months later. In all 20 cases,             
 
     
      
      
        
    
    
     
   
    
               
           
        
    
     
    
   
        
     
          
  
 
 
      
  
     
        
    
    
      
        
    
     
     
    
     
      
       
    Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 18 of 53 
videolaryngostroboscopy showed significant improvement of the glottic 
closure, the improvement in acoustical parameters was statistically significant (p < 0.01). Perceptual evaluation of GRBAS scale showed 
significant improvement of phonatory function on G, B, A scale. The 
results remained stable 6 to 24 months after operation and were not changed by the length of follow -up. And in the 6 cases, 
videolaryngostroboscopy showed significant improvement of the glottic closure at 3 months compared with pre- operative observation, a little 
spindle- shaped disclosure. The improvement in acoustical parameters 
was significant statistically at 3, 6 and 24 months (p < 0.05 or < 0.01), the 
voice quality decreased significantly at 6 and 24 months compared with 3 
months (p < 0.05 or < 0.01). The significant differences were not observed between 6 and 24 months (p > 0.05). No complications were observed in all patients peri -operatively or during the follow -up period. 
Voice -related parameters jitter, normalized noise energy and maximum 
phonation time showed significant differences between Group A and Group B on 24 months (p < 0.05 or < 0.01). The authors concluded that 
the combination of autologous fascia and fat vocal fold injection is an effective procedure for the treatment of unilateral vocal fold paralysis, and 
the stable results can be achieved during the follow -up period for 24 
months. 
Mazzola et al (2011) stated that minimally- invasive autologous fat 
injection of the head and neck region can be considered a valid alternative to major invasive surgical procedures both for aesthetic and functional purposes. The favorable outcomes of autologous fat injection 
in otolaryngological practice are due to the filling of soft tissue and, mainly, to the potential regenerative effect of adipose- derived 
mesenchymal stem cells. Herewith, some important biological 
preliminary remarks were described underlying the potential of 
autologous fat injection in regenerative medicine, and personal 
experience in using it for both consolidated clinical applications, such as 
fat grafting to the face and vocal fold augmentation in the treatment of glottic incompetence, and more recent applications including the treatment of post -parotidectomy Frey syndrome and velopharyngeal 
insufficiency. The authors noted that vocal fold augmentation by means of autologous fat injections for glottic incompetence has been standardized and used in their clinic for several years.             
 
     
          
      
       
        
         
 
       
     
   
      
  
 
         
          
         
        
   
        
     
          
       
       
        
       
       
     
      
     
     
          
        
       
 
     
         
        
          
        Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 19 of 53 
Radiesse, originally approved as a wrinkle filler, received additional 
clearance from the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of 
vocal cord insufficiency (2007). Radiesse is injected lateral to the vocal folds and the vocalis muscle. The bulking effect of the implant medializes 
the vocal folds, facilitating speech and preventing inadvertent aspiration 
of liquids, as well as correcting shortness of breath caused by laryngeal incompetence. The Radiesse injection procedure can be performed 
percutaneously or trans -orally with endoscopic guidance, with local or 
topical anesthetic as required. Since the procedure can be performed in-
office with the patient awake and able to talk, patients' speech can be 
evaluated immediately and the amount of material needed for optimal correction can be more accurately determined. 
Carroll et al (2011) reported the long- term effectiveness of 
CaHA/Radiesse as a vocal fold injectable by assessing data from a 
cohort of patients who underwent injection for glottal insufficiency. 
Patients who underwent CaHA injection for glottal insufficiency of any 
etiology were considered for inclusion in the study. The change in VHI -10 
scores between pre-injection scores and best post-injection scores as 
well as between the pre- injection and the most recent VHI -10 scores were 
used as primary outcome measures to determine the persistence of 
benefit or the time to loss of benefit. Complications among the cohort were identified. A total of 90 patients who underwent 108 vocal fold 
injections with CaHA were evaluated for inclusion. Twenty patients with 
22 injections met the criteria for inclusion. Fourteen of 22 (64 %) subjects showed loss of benefit of the CaHA material. The average length of 
benefit was 18.6 months, with a range of 8 to 36 months. Three 
complications were identified among the original cohort of 108 injections. The authors concluded that CaHA remains a safe and effective long- term 
vocal fold injectable with an average length of benefit of 18.6 months. 
Three complications were seen among 108 CaHA injections. They stated 
that CaHA is a long- term injectable with an excellent track record that does 
not appear to warrant concern for permanent or late complications. 
Yung and colleagues (2011) examined if temporary vocal fold injection 
affects the need for permanent medialization laryngoplasty in patients 
with UVFP. A total of 175 patients with dysphonia resulting from UVFP 
were identified. Patients with documented recovery of vocal fold mobility, 
less than 9 months of follow -up after diagnosis of UVFP, previous             
 
       
         
    
   
       
      
    
    
   
      
    
       
  
   
 
           
      
        
       
      
     
           
   
       
     
   
      
     
       
       
         
     
     
  
         
      
    
   Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 20 of 53 
treatment at other institutions, neoplastic disease involving the larynx, or 
history of radiation to the larynx were excluded. A total of 54 patients met all inclusion/exclusion criteria. Rates of permanent medialization 
laryngoplasty in patients undergoing vocal fold injection were compared 
with those of patients who chose observation or voice therapy. A total of 
35 % of patients underwent temporary injection medialization, and the remaining 65 % chose conservative management. Five of 19 of the 
temporary injection medialization patients subsequently underwent permanent intervention compared to 23 of 35 of the conservative 
management group (p = 0.0131). The authors concluded that UVFP 
patients who underwent vocal fold injection with an agent intended to provide temporary medialization were statistically significantly less likely 
to undergo permanent medialization laryngoplasty compared to those patients who were treated with conservative management only. 
Song et al (2010) noted that a variety of materials as well as approaches have been used to treat glottic insufficiency, but the ideal procedure has yet to be determined. The goal of this study was evaluate the safety and effectiveness of cross -linked hyaluronic acid (HA; Restylane) for office-
based injection laryngoplasty for the treatment of vocal fold (VF) immobility. These researchers performed a retrospective chart review of 
27 patients with VF immobility; 25 received Restylane VF injections in the 
office setting via percutaneous, trans -thyrohyoid injection with distal chip 
endoscopic guidance. Two patients received injections using suspension 
microlaryngoscopy under general anesthesia. Voice outcomes were followed using the Voice- Related Quality of Life Survey and the Voice 
Outcome Survey. Four patients were lost to follow -up immediately after 
injection; 20 of 23 patients (87 %) reported subjective improvement in voice. Analysis of subjective surveys from 9 patients revealed a trend 
toward improvement of V -RQOL from 34 to 23 (p = 0.083); but did not 
reach significance. After compilation of all VOS questions, 69 % of all 
follow -up responses noted improvement of symptoms, 24 % were 
unchanged and 7 % were worse. The authors concluded that office-
based injection laryngoplasty with Restylane appears to be a safe 
procedure that improves vocal function in patients with glottal 
insufficiency due to impaired VF mobility. Moreover, they stated that 
further studies are needed to quantify the benefits and to compare the 
effects with other injectable materials.             
 
            
    
        
       
      
     
 
    
         
     
      
        
       
    
      
 
           
    
    
         
       
        
           
      
     
     Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 21 of 53 
In a prospective study, Wang et al (2012) examined the feasibility of using 
an injectable needle electrode to guide VF injection (VFI) of HA during 
laryngeal electromyography (LEMG) for unilateral VF paralysis (UVFP). From March to June 2010, a total of 20 UVFP patients received LEMG 
examination. Before completion of LEMG, 1.0 cc of HA (Restylane 
Perlane®; Q -Med, Uppsala, Sweden) was injected via a 26- gauge 
monopolar injectable needle electrode into paralyzed thyroarytenoid 
muscle. After injection, 20 patients completed 3- month follow -up and 16 
patients completed 6-month follow -up. The data before, 1 week, 3 
months, and 6 months after injection, including the normalized glottal gap area (NGGA) from videostroboscopy, maximal phonation time (MPT), mean airflow rate (MAFR), phonation quotient (PQ), perceptual evaluation 
of voice (grade, roughness, breathiness, asthenia, strain [GRBAS] sc ale), 
Voice Handicap Index (VHI), and self -grading of choking (grade 1 to 7), 
were analyzed by the Wilcoxon signed rank test. All of the patients completed the procedure without  complications.  After  injection,  mean 
NGGA  was  significantly  reduced from  8.28 units  to 0.52 units  (1 week),  
1.79 units  (3 months),  and 1.36 units  (6 months).  The mean MPT  was  
prolonged from  5.66 seconds  to 11.73,  11.25,  and 11.93 seconds,  
respectively.  Voice Handicap Index  HI  was  reduced from  76.05 to 38.10,  
37.40  and  35.00,  respect ively.  Other  analyzed  data  (PQ,  MAFR,  GRBAS 
scale,  and choking severity)  also showed statistically  significant  
improvement.  The  authors  concluded  that  LEMG -guided  HA  VFI  
provides  UVFP  patients  with neuromuscular  function evaluation and 
treatment  in one step.  This  clinical  technique is  feasible,  and the short - 
term  results  are satisfactory.  These preliminary  findings  need to be 
validated by  well-designed studies  with more patients  and  longer  follow - 
up.  
In a Cochrane review, Lakhani et al (2012) evaluated the effectiveness of 
alternative injection materials in the treatment of UVFP. These 
investigators searched the Cochrane Ear, Nose and Throat Disorders 
Group Trials Register; the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 
(CENTRAL); PubMed; EMBASE; CINAHL; Web of Science; BIOSIS 
Previews; Cambridge Scientific Abstracts; ICTRP and additional sources 
for published and unpublished trials. The date of the most recent search 
was March 23, 2012. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of injectable 
materials in patients with UVFP were selected for analysis. The 
outcomes of interest were patient and clinician- reported improvement,             
 
         
     
       
            
    
        
     
       
        
       
      
 
 
      
          
      
  
 
      
      
       
   
   
   
       
       
       
     
      
   
    
        
     
         
   
    
        
         
   Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 22 of 53 
and adverse events. Two authors independently selected studies from 
the search results and extracted data. They used the Cochrane 'Risk of 
bias' tool to assess study quality. These researchers identified no RCTs 
that met the inclusion criteria for this review. They excluded 18 studies on 
methodological grounds: 16 non- randomized studies; 1 RCT due to 
inadequate randomization and inclusion of non- UVFP patients; and 1 
RCT that compared 2 different particle sizes of the same injectable material. The authors concluded that there is currently insufficient high-quality evidence for, or against, specific injectable materials for patients 
with UVFP. They stated that future RCTs should aim to provide a direct 
comparison of the alternative materials currently available for injection 
medialization. 
A Food and Drug Administration’s MAUDE Adverse Event Report on “Q ­
MED AB. Restylane injectable gelinjectable dermal filler” (FDA, 2007; last 
updated 1/31/2013) noted that vocal cord paralysis is not an approved indication for Restylane use. 
The consensus report on “Vocal fold scars” by the Phonosurgery Com mittee of the European Laryngological Society (Friedrich et al, 2013) 
stated that scarring of the vocal folds leads to a deterioration of the highly 
complex micro -structure with consecutively impaired vibratory pattern and 
glottic insufficiency. The resulting dysphonia is predominantly 
characterized by a reduced vocal capacity. Despite the considerable 
progress in understanding of the underlying pathophysiology, the 
treatment of scarred vocal folds is still an unresolved chapter in 
laryngology and phonosurgery. Essential for a successful treatment is an 
individual, multi -dimensional concept that comprises the whole 
armamentarium of surgical and non- surgical (e.g., voice therapy) 
modalities. An ideal approach would be to soften the scar, because the reduced pliability and consequently the increased vibratory rigidity impede 
the easiness of vibration. The chosen phonosurgical method is 
determined by the main clinical feature: Medialization techniques for the treatment of glottic gap, or epithelium freeing techniques for improvement of vibration characteristics often combined with injection augmentation or 
implantation. In severe cases, buccal mucosa grafting can be an option. 
New developments, include treatment with anxiolytic lasers (e.g., pulse 
dye laser [PDL]; potassium titanyl phosphate [KTP] laser), laser 
technology with ultrafine excision/ablation properties avoiding coagulation             
 
      
           
      
    
 
      
      
 
     
       
       
      
    
          
     
       
       
     
       
    
           
           
      
    
         
      
    
     
        
         
       
       
         
          
   Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 23 of 53 
(Picosecond infrared laser, PIRL), or techniques of tissue engineering. 
However, the authors concluded that despite the promising results by in-
vitro experiments, animal studies and first clinical trials, the step into clinical routine application has yet to be taken. 
Injection Pharyngoplasty with Calcium Hydroxyapatite (Radiesse) 
for the Treatment of Velopharyngeal/Velopalatal Insuﬃciency 
In an observational case- series study, Sipp and colleagues (2008) 
evaluated the effectiveness of injectable CaHA for treatment of velo­
palatal insufficiency (VPI). A total of 7 patients treated with inj ectable 
CaHA for VPI and followed for 10 to 24 months were included in this analysis. Subjects were children aged 6 to 16 years with clinically 
significant VPI stemming from documented small VP gaps and who did 
not benefit from speech therapy were treated with CaHA injection 
pharyngoplasty.  Treatment  success  was  defined as  (i) speech  
improvement  to  the  degree  that  parents  felt  no  additional  treatment  
was needed, and (ii) meeting post -operative nasometric measures.  
Treatment failure was defined as parental report of insufficient 
improvement in speech. Complications and additional treatments for VPI 
were noted. There were no major complications in any of the 7 children injected with CaHA. There was 1 minor complication: 1 patient was re ­
admitted for post -operative pain and dehydration. Of the 7 patients, 4 
experienced a satisfactory result for up to 17 months. Findings from post­
operative nasometry were either within reference range, or less than 1 SD 
greater than the reference range, for all sounds. There were 3 treatment 
failures, each with pre- existing craniofacial abnormality. Two patients in 
the group that failed treatment later underwent revision superior 
pharyngeal flap surgery without complication or hindrance from the CaHA injection; 4 children underwent subsequent magnetic resonance imaging evaluations up to 1 year after injection, which revealed no evidence of migration. The authors concluded that the findings of this small series 
suggested that posterior pharyngeal wall injection with CaHA was safe 
and may be effective in treating select patients with VPI. They stated that further longitudinal studies, with a larger series of patients, examining the safety, effectiveness, and patient selection are needed to better 
understand the possible use of posterior pharyngeal wall injection of 
CaHA in children with symptomatic VPI.             
 
        
      
    
      
         
       
   
     
     
        
   
     
    
  
         
         
     
      
       
    
    
       
   
          
       
        
        
       
      
    
 
         
 
   
        
         
  Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 24 of 53 
Brigger et al (2010) identified children who may benefit from CaHA 
injection pharyngoplasty for symptomatic VPI. Children with symptomatic 
VPI as defined by abnormal speech associated with subjective and objective measures of hyper -nasality were included in this study. Main 
outcome measure was nasalence scores recorded as number of standard 
deviations (SDs) from normalized scores, and perceptual scoring 
recorded as standardized weighted score and caretaker satisfaction from direct report. A total of 12 children who had undergone injection pharyngoplasty with CaHA were identified. Of the 12 children, 8 showed 
success at 3 months as defined by nasalence (less than 1 SD above 
normal nasalance scores), perceptual scoring (decrease in weighted score), and overall caretaker satisfaction. Four children were followed up 
for more than 24 months and continued to demonstrate stable success. 
The 4 children who failed the procedure all failed before the 3- month 
evaluation and demonstrated increased baseline severity of VPI as 
defined by increased pre-operative nasalence scores (5.25 SD versus 2.4 
SD above normalized scores), perceptual scores (weighted score, 4.25 versus 3.85), and characteristic nasendoscopy findings of a broad- based 
velopharyngeal gap or unilateral adynamism; 3 of the 4 treatment failures 
occurred early in the senior author's (C.J.H.) experience with the 
technique. The authors concluded that injection pharyngoplasty with CaHA is a useful adjunct in the treatment of children with mild VPI. 
Safety and effectiveness have been demonstrated more than 24 months 
after injection. Patient selection and operative technique are critical to the 
success of the procedure. Success is seen most often in children with mild VPI and small well-defined velopharyngeal gaps consistent with 
touch closure. This was a small study (n = 12); and there may have been overlapping of patients with the study by Sipp et al (2008) because the senior author of both studies appeared to be C.J.H. These preliminary 
findings need to be validated by well -designed studies. 
Laryngeal EMG for the Evaluation of Vocal Fold Paralysis 
Munin and colleagues (2016) developed an evidence- based consensus 
statement regarding use of LEMG for diagnosis and treatment of vocal fold paralysis after recurrent laryngeal neuropathy (RLN). Two questions 
regarding LEMG were analyzed:             
 
 
   
 
       
       
      
      
      
       
      
           
      
      
     
      
 
           
      
      
    
     
     Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 25 of 53 
(i) Does LEMG predict  recovery in patients with acute unilateral or  
bilateral  vocal  fold  paralysis?  and  (ii)  Do  LEMG  ﬁndings  change  clinical 
management in these individuals?  A  systematic  review  was  performed  
using American Academy  of  Neurology  criteria for  rating of  diagnostic  
accuracy.  Active voluntary  motor  unit  potential  recruitment  and presence 
of  poly -phasic  motor  unit  potentials  within the first  6 months  after  lesion 
onset  predicted recovery.  Positive sharp waves  and/or  fibrillation 
potentials  did not  predict  outcome.  The presence of  electrical  synkinesis  
may  decrease the likelihood of  recovery,  based on 1 published study;  
LEMG  altered clinical  management  by  changing the initial  diagnosis  from  
RLN  in 48 %  of  cases.  Cricoarytenoid fixation and superior  laryngeal  
neuropathy  were the most  common other  diagnoses  observed.  The 
authors  concluded that  if  prognostic  information  is  needed  in  a  patient  
with vocal  fold paralysis  that  is  more than 4 weeks  and less  than 6 
months  in duration,  then LEMG  should be performed.  Moreover,  they  
stated that  LEMG  may  be performed to clarify  treatment  decisions  for  
vocal  fold immobility  that  is  presumed to be caused by  RLN.  
Botulinum Toxin Injection 
Benninger and associates (2016) noted that bilateral vocal fold paralysis 
most commonly results from iatrogenic trauma to the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve during surgical procedures in the anterior neck. Patients may require tracheostomy because of acute or gradual onset of dyspnea and 
airway compromise. The intra- laryngeal injection of Botox has been 
considered as a possible therapy for these airway symptoms of bilateral 
vocal fold paralysis. Chronic unopposed activity of intact cricothyroid 
muscles could potentially result in gradual medialization of the vocal folds 
in patients with bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis. This case 
series described 3 patients who successfully underwent injections of botulinum toxin (BTX) into the bilateral cricothyroid muscles to offer sustained relief of dyspnea resulting from bilateral v ocal fold paralysis. 
Woisard and colleagues (2017) stated that data regarding the use of BTX 
in laryngeal dyspnea, are scarce, coming from some cases reports in the literature, including Vocal fold paralysis, laryngeal dystonia, vocal cord dysfunction also called paradoxical motion of the vocal fold (PMVF), and 
post- neuroleptic laryngeal dyskinesia. There is no consensus regarding 
the muscles and the doses to inject. In a retrospective study, these             
 
      
          
       
         
    
   
     
        
     
        
         
    
      
    
     
       
           
        
         
       
        
        
      
    
     
  
 
         
 
           
        
     
       
       
   
     
            
     
     Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 26 of 53 
researchers presented a review of patients treated in their ENT 
Department by BTX injection in this indication. Patients who underwent 
an injection of BTX for laryngeal dyspnea in the ENT Department from 
2005 to 2015 years. The inclusion criteria were a dyspnea associated 
with a laryngeal dysfunction, confirmed by flexible fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy. Information concerning the causes of the 
dyspnea, the BTX injections procedure, post -injection follow -up, and 
respiratory outcome were collected for all patients included. A total of 13 patients included; the main cause identified as principal factor linked with 
the short breath was: a bilateral VF paralysis, laryngeal dystonia , anxiety 
syndrome associated with unilateral vocal fold paralysis or asthma, and 
an isolated asthma; 9 out of the 13 patients improved following the injections. A BTX-induced stable benefit for 4 patients led them to stop 
the injections in the follow -up. Good outcome was observed in 5 other 
patients (main cause: bilateral VP paralysis), allowing a progressive lengthening of the delay between BTX injections; 4 patients did not report a positive risk/benefit ratio after BTX injections; 2 of them (with bilateral 
VF paralysis), because of respiratory side effects and lack of benefit without the side effects for the 2 others. This failure of effect was not 
related with BTX doses injected. The authors concluded that this study provided support for using BTX injections as a symptomatic treatment of periodic laryngeal dyspnea, regardless of the etiologic context. They 
suggested that a small starting dose (about 4 units of BTX) could be enough for a first injection to obtain a good benefit. The target muscle 
should be determined by the EMG analysis. These preliminary findings 
need to be validated by well -designed studies. 
Steroid Injection After Microsurgical Removal of Vocal Fold Lesions 
Mortensen (2010) noted that vocal fold scar is generally caused by 
trauma or from iatrogenic causes such as intubation, radiation therapy, or phono- microsurgery. Once a vocal fold scar has occurred it becomes a 
difficult problem to treat. There are many different tools that 
otolaryngologists use for vocal fold scar treatment. This investigator 
reviewed the literature and discussed the usefulness of laryngeal steroid injection for the treatment of vocal fold scar. Steroid injection can be 
carried out on an outpatient basis using a rigid laryngeal telescope or with 
a flexible laryngoscope under topical anesthesia. This technique allows 
easy surgical manipulation with a good visual field and an easy accurate             
 
    
           
      
      
 
      
    
      
     
    
   
     
        
      
        
       
     
    
      
      
    
        
          
     
             
      
        
            
          
    
 
 
       
    
      
       
    
          
    Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 27 of 53 
approach to the lesion. The author stated that steroid injection of the 
scarred vocal fold using an office- based technique was one of the ways 
that clinicians could treat vocal fold scarring that may improve the patient's voice outcomes with minimal side effects or complications. 
In a retrospective, single- center, cohort study, Cho and colleagues (2017) 
examined the safety and effectiveness of immediate intralesional steroid (ILS) injection in patients undergoing laryngeal microsurgery (LMS) for benign vocal fold lesions (BVFLs). Subjects were divided into two groups 
according to whether or not they received adjunctive steroid injection 
following LMS. These investigators examined the outcomes using 
objec tive, perceptual voice analysis and videostroboscopy. Furthermore, 
they analyzed clinical parameters and identified risk factors associated 
with persistent dysphonia after LMS. The study included a total of 211 
patients with BVFLs (82 men and 129 women), which comprised 136 
vocal polyps (64.5 %), 49 nodules (23.2 %), and 30 cysts (14.2 %); 84 
patients (39.8 %) ILS administration combined with LMS. The overall results for post -operative voice parameters in both groups were 
significantly improved. On videostroboscopic examination, the rate of 
recurrent lesions was lower in the group that received adjunctive ILS injection than in the group with only LMS (p = 0.014). In the multi -variate 
analysis, older age (compared to less than 50 years of age; odds r atio 
[OR] = 2.697, 95 % confidence interval [CI]: 1.300 to 5.595, p = 0.008) and 
duration of hoarseness longer than 6 months (compared to less than 3 
months; OR = 2.729, 95 % CI: 1.193 to 6.242, p = 0.017) were identified 
as independent risk factors associated with persistent dysphonia. 
Nevertheless, adjunctive ILS injection was associated with a 0.3-fold 
(OR = 0.345, 95 % CI: 0.152 to 0.784, p = 0.011) lower risk of persistent 
dysphonia. The authors concluded that ILS injection combined with LMS 
in the treatment of BVFLs was safe and associated with improved voice 
quality. 
In a RCT, Ramavat and co- workers (2019) examined the efficacy of ILS 
injection in small benign vocal fold lesions and compared the outcomes with microlaryngeal surgery in terms of improvement in symptoms and 
reduction in lesion size. This trial was carried out in the Department of 
Otolaryngology at the Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research in Chandigarh between 2014 and 2015. The clinical diagnosis 
was based on appearance of the lesion during endoscopy and the             
 
        
       
    
    
    
   
 
         
     
    
     
     
        
      
     
          
          
  
    
    
           
   
     
   
    
 
      
 
 
       
    
     
        
         Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 28 of 53 
mucosal vibration pattern. Subjects with lesions of size less than or equal 
to 5 mm were included. A total of 29 subjects were included in the study 
and 15 (9 men and 6 women) of them were randomized to receive ILS injection; 14 (13 men and 1 woman) were randomized to the second 
group to receive initial microlaryngeal surgery. These researchers noted 
significant reduction in the size of the lesion among subjects undergoing ILS  injection  at  12  weeks  (1.11  +  1.45  mm)  as  compared  to  baseline  (2.63  
+  1.28  mm)  with  no  recurrence.  The  authors  concluded  that  ILSs  were 
effective in reducing size of  lesion and also improved acoustic  
parameters,  perceptual  analysis,  and grade of  dysphonia  in patients  
presenting with small  benign vocal  cord lesions.  
In a retrospective review, Al-Ali and colleagues (2020) examined the 
effect of steroid injection on vocal function in professional voice users associated with a benign lesion(s) using the VHI -10. This st udy included 
patients (professional voice users) who underwent 1 or more steroid 
injection(s) between July 2014 and December 2018. The VHI- 10 was 
compared from pre-to post- treatment. Patients were identified using 
billing code data for laryngeal injection. Patient demographics (age, 
gender, profession), previous phono- surgery, date of steroid injection and 
follow -up dates as well as VHI-10 scores were collected from the 
electronic medical record. A total of 24 patients were identified. The 
mean VH I-10 score decreased from 23.5 pre- injection to 17.8 post -
injection, which represented a reduction of 24.3 %. Vocal fold steroid 
injection procedure in this series was associated with 1 complication. The 
authors concluded that vocal fold steroid injection for benign lesions was 
a safe, well -tolerated procedure with an improvement in vocal function 
without surgical intervention. These researchers stated that steroid 
injection should be considered as a therapeutic option to avoid surgery in patients with select vocal fold lesions. 
Deﬂux (Dextranomer/Hyaluronic Acid Copolymer) for the 
Treatment of Velopharyngeal Insuﬃciency 
Brinjikji et al (2015) stated that dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer 
implants are used in treating velo- pharyngeal insufficiency (VPI). These 
posterior nasopharyngeal implants can be mistaken for pathologic 
conditions such as retropharyngeal abscess on imaging. In a 
retrospective study, these researchers studied the imaging appearance of             
 
     
      
      
        
  
        
    
      
        
     
   
     
    
      
     
   
    
           
      
     
    
     
 
     
    
   
  
 
 
       
           
       
    
    
   
           
  
 Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 29 of 53 
dextranomer/hyal uronic acid copolymer implants in patients treated for 
velopharyngeal insufficiency. They carried out a consecutive series of 
patients with VPI treated with dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer. Data on patient characteristics and volume of dextranomer/hyaluronic 
acid copolymer injected were obtained. Post- operative imaging 
characteristics on plain radiography, CT, and MR imaging were 
assessed. The imaging appearance of post -operative complications was 
determined. A total of 16 patients were included in this study; 7 
underwent post- operative plain radiographs, 5 patients underwent CT, 
and 9 patients underwent MR imaging. Plain radiographs demonstrated 
soft-tissue swelling in the retropharyngeal space, which resolved at 1 
month. On CT, dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer implants 
appeared as bilateral nasopharyngeal soft -tissue masses iso -attenuated 
to hypo- attenuated relative to muscle in 80 % (4/5) of patients. On MR 
imaging, dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer implants appeared as bilater al nasopharyngeal soft -tissue masses that were iso -intense to 
muscle on T1 (8/9, 88.9 %) and hyperintense to muscle on T2 (8/9, 88.9 
%) and demonstrated no restricted diffusion (4/4, 100.0 %) or peripheral 
enhancement (7/7, 100.0 %). The authors concluded that normal post ­
operative findings of posterior nasopharyngeal dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer injection on MR imaging was characterized by the presence of bilateral nasopharyngeal soft -tissue masses that were 
isointense to muscle on T1 and hyper -intense on T2, with no restricted 
diffusion or peripheral enhancement. These researchers stated that 
velopharyngeal dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer implants were 
iso-to hypo- attenuated to muscle on CT and were not visible 
radiographically once associated implantation- related swelling has 
resolved. 
The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. Because this was a retrospective study, the use of the various imaging modalities could 
not be standardized. There was a wide range of follow -up times for post ­
operative imaging, which limited the ability to determine any temporal changes to the imaging appearance of hyaluronic acid implants. Furthermore, no patients who received dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer implants for VPI have yet been followed beyond 2 years, the 
period beyond which calcifications have been reported in the urologic 
literature.             
 
       
      
    
       
           
      
    
     
      
     
       
     
      
          
      
      
      
     
 
      
          
     
     
       
       
     
    
       
     
     
          
     
  
     
        
     
             
     
            Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 30 of 53 
In a retrospective, case- series study, Cofer et al (2016) examined the 
effectiveness, durability, and safety of a tissue filler (dextranomer and 
hyaluronic acid copolymer) when injected submucosally in the nasopharynx to treat VPI in pediatric patients. Charts were reviewed for 
all patients treated with injectable filler at a tertiary children's center for 
VPI from April 2010 through September 2013. Main outcome measures 
included perceptual speech assessments before and after the procedure, velopharyngeal gap size on nasal endoscopy, and nasalance. Length of follow -up, length of surgery, hospital admission, and complications were 
also identified. After injection augmentation pharyngoplasty, 93 % of 
patients had no or mild hypernasality, 83 % had resolution of nasal grimace, and 96 % had resolution of audible nasal emission. Complications were minor and included mucosal infection, neck pain, snoring, and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). The authors concluded that 
the use of injectable filler to augment the nasopharynx was an effective, minimally invasive therapy for small or moderate- sized velopharyngeal 
gaps, with shorter procedural times, easier recovery, and acceptable durability. Level of Evidence = IV. 
In a retrospective, case- series study, Peck and co- workers (2017) 
described the treatment of adult VPI with injection of a hyaluronic acid 
and dextranomer copolym er (Dx/HA). This trial consisted of 25 
consecutively treated adults with VPI who underwent Dx/HA injection 
pharyngoplasty in a multi -disciplinary clinic from January 1, 2011, to 
December 31, 2014. Data recorded included etiology of VPI, perceptual 
analysis of resonance, nasalance scores, and estimation of 
velopharyngeal gap characteristics on video nasal endoscopy before and after the intervention. Statistical comparisons were made using a 2- tailed 
Wilcoxon signed rank test and the Kruskal -Wallis test. Patients had VPI 
due to a neurologic etiology, due to a benign anatomic etiology, or acquired after treatment for a head and neck malignancy. Injections were 
performed with local anesthesia, monitored anesthesia care, or general anesthesia. There were statistically significant improvements in speech 
resonance, nasalance, and velopharyngeal gap size after treatment. 
Patients with neurologic or benign anatomic etiologies of their VPI had 
more significant improvement than those with VPI following treatment of 
malignancy; 19 of the 25 patients required only 1 injection to achieve their 
final result. The authors concluded that injection pharyngoplasty with a 
readily available Dx/HA was an effective treatment for VPI that allowed for             
 
        
       
      
   
        
 
       
          
       
      
       
          
      
   
        
   
    
      
        
      
   
   
       
     
     
  
 
    
        
       
  
 
        
 
        
       
        
      
         Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 31 of 53 
titration to complete velopharyngeal closure under local anesthesia or 
light sedation. It is most effective in patients with non- malignant 
etiologies of VPI and in those with good lateral wall motion. 
Complications experienced were post- operative neck pain and occult 
retropharyngeal fluid collection, highlighting the importance of follow -up. 
The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. Because of 
the novel use of Dx/HA in the treatment of VPI, this study was not 
powered to perform robust statistical analyses and evaluate subgroups or 
perform multi -variate analysis, although these investigators identified 
areas for future investigation. Follow -up of these patients was variable, 
and the longevity of the injection was not completely understood, 
although some patients had excellent results for more than 2 years. In 
the future, these patients will continue to be followed- up with an eye 
toward the longevity of their symptom improvement and what factors may 
predispose a patient to needing repeated injections. Furthermore, these researchers had begun to use patient quality -of-life (QOL) surveys, such 
as the VPI Effects on Life Outcomes instrument to better understand 
patient satisfaction and perceptions. In addition, this study did not 
analyze none of the speech- related manifestations of VPI, such as nasal 
regurgitation and associated dysphagia. They hoped to collect more 
detailed data on these aspects to more completely define QOL outcomes in the future. Finally, the authors hoped that this study would spur 
controlled comparisons of Dx/HA with other materials used in injection pharyngoplasty, such as autologous fat, which would be extremely beneficial to the literature. 
Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Adenoidectomy in children: 
Postoperative care and complications” (Messner, 2020) does not mention 
Deflux or dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer as a management / 
therapeutic option. 
Juvederm for the Treatment of Vocal Cord Paralysis 
Upton et al (2013) stated that the role of Juvederm Ultra Plus hyaluronic 
acid gel for use in injection laryngoplasty has not been well examined. These researchers prospectively examined the safety and effectiveness 
of office- based injection laryngoplasty of Juvederm Ultra Plus gel in 
patients with glottic insufficiency. A total of 30 patients met the criteria for             
 
 
       
        
       
     
            
     
    
      
      
     
       
   
   
    
        
     
 
      
    
    
       
      
         
   
    
     
        
    
     
   
      
      
     
     
    
            
    
       Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 32 of 53 
study inclusion and were treated with un- sedated office- based injection 
laryngoplasty of Juvederm Ultra Plus gel over a 20- month period. The 
pre-injection acoust ic and aerodynamic measures, Voice Handicap Index 
(VHI), Glottal Function Index (GFI), and Dysphonia Severity Index (DSI) 
were compared with values recorded at 1 and 4 months after injection. Data for 27 patients were available for follow -up analysis at 1 month, and 
12 patients' data were available at 4 months. Significant improvements, compared to pre- injection levels (p < 0.02), were shown in all outcome 
measures at 1 and 4 months; 1 patient required intravenous (IV) steroid 
therapy for delayed glottic inflammation that resolved without permanent sequelae. The authors concluded that the injection of Juvederm Ultra 
Plus gel was a relatively safe procedure that allowed for short -term 
improvements in objective and subjective outcome measures of vocal 
function in patients with glottic insufficiency, provided the surgeon remained alert to the possibility of post -procedural injection site 
inflammation. This was a small study with short- term follow -ups (n = 27 
for 1- month follow -up; and n = 12 for 4- month follow -up). 
Bertroche et al (2019) noted that injection laryngoplasty has become valuable in treating laryngologic disorders including vocal cord atrophy, paralysis, and paresis. Although materials such as 
carboxymethylcellulose and calcium hydroxylapatite are Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approved, they are not without limitations. Juvederm (hyaluronic acid) is an alternative treatment that is not FDA -
approved. Although studies have examined Juvederm' s longevity in 
cutaneous injections, there are limited data examining durability of 
Juvederm used in laryngoplasty. In a retrospective, cohort study, these 
researchers examined the longevity and effectiveness of Juvederm used 
in injection laryngoplasty. Subjects who underwent injection laryngoplasty 
using Juvederm were reviewed. Longevity was defined as the time 
between injection and the date that a patient first noted subjective deterioration of their voice. All subjects were subsequently followed using 
videostroboscopy to evaluate for Juvederm resorption. Longevity was analyzed using a Kaplan- Meier survival model, and effectiveness of 
laryngoplasty was determined using the Voice- Related Quality of Life 
(VR-QOL) index scores and analyzed using a Wilcoxon signed ranks 
test. A total of 59 subjects met inclusion criteria and underwent Juvederm 
injection laryngoplasty. Kaplan- Meier survival analysis revealed a mean 
longevity of 10.6 months (95 % confidence interval [CI]: 9.1 to 12.0             
 
     
        
           
        
      
       
    
      
     
 
       
 
 
     
        
   
 
           
      
 
      
      
      
      
          
       
       
    Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 33 of 53 
months). Wilcoxon signed ranks analysis of the pre- and post- injection 
VRQOL scores revealed improvement, with  a mean pre-injection VRQOL 
of 49.2 (standard deviation [SD] = 25.8) and mean post- injection VR-QOL 
of 68.2 (SD = 27.5) (p < 0.001). The authors concluded that injection 
laryngoplasty using Juvederm is an effective treatment for vocal cord 
atrophy, paralysis, and paresis. Knowledge of the patient -defined 
duration of benefit following laryngoplasty using Juvederm played an important role in counseling patients as well as in the planning of future interventions. Level of evidence = IV. 
Interarytenoid Augmentation with Injectable Filler for the 
Management of Posterior Laryngeal Clefts in Infants 
Yeung and associates (2017) noted that the diagnosis and management 
of type 
I laryngeal clefts (LCs) can be controversial and varies across 
centers and surgeons. These researchers used existing peer -reviewed 
literature to develop an expert -based consensus to aid in guiding 
physicians in the treatment of these patients as well as develop research 
hypotheses to further study this condition. They provided recommendations  for  the diagnosis  and management  of  type I  LCs.  
Consensus  recommendations  included diagnostic  workup,  medical  
management,  pre-operati ve, intra- operative and post -operative 
considerations  for  type I  LCs.  The authors  stated that  the options  for  
surgical  intervention include interarytenoid augmentation with injectable 
filler  and  endoscopic  suture  repair  of  the  laryngo- tracheo- esophageal  cleft  
(LTEC).  The benefits  of  interarytenoid filler  injection included its  
reversibility,  short  procedure time,  as  well  as  evaluation of  the potential  
effect  of  a definitive repair.  The potential  risks  of  injection included filler  
migration into the subglottis,  untoward fibrotic  scarring of  the injected 
regions,  as  well  as  the need for  repeat  procedure.  
Loh and coll
eagues (2019) stated that LC poses a diagnostic challenge 
because of its rarity and non- specific clinical features. There is poor 
consensus regarding the management as either conservative or surgical 
management may be appropriate for type 1 LC, given the spectrum of disease patients present with. In a systematic review, these investigators 
examined the current literature and proposed diagnostic and 
management pathways for type 1 LC. This systematic review used data collected from PubMed, Medline and Cochrane library. A quality             
 
           
      
         
 
    
      
      
     
        
     
        
  
      
    
         
         
     
           
             
           
       
         
      
     
      Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 34 of 53 
assessment of included studies was carried out using a validated tool. A 
meta- analysis of proportions was performed for the outcome of each 
treatment modality using MedCalc software. Of 674 potential studies, 19 
were included.  Complete resolution rates  of  conservative management,  
injection augmentation and endoscopic  surgery  were 52.3 %  (95 %  CI:  
32.3 to 71.9 %),  69.2 %  (95 %  CI:  59.1 to 78.1 %)  and 65.4 %  (95 %  CI:  
49.1  to  80.1  %),  respectively.  There  were  research  survey,  diagnostic  
and  treatment  algorithms,  and  radiological  investigations  presented  in  the 
literature to aid in constructing an updated management  algorithm.  The 
authors  recommended that  all  patients  received initial  3-month trial  of  
conservative therapy.  Endoscopic  surgery  may  be considered if  
conservative management  fails  or  in the presence of  other  surgical  
indications.  Injection augmentation may  be performed prior  to definitive 
surgical  repair  in  selected patients  who have co- morbidities  that  increase 
aspiration risk  to evaluate the potential  effect  of  surgery.  
In a retrospective study, Isaac and co- workers (2020) described 
indicat ions for injection augmentation (IA), endoscopic repair (ER) and 
conservative methods for the management of type 1 LC (LC1). These 
researchers also compared success of IA and ER and determined 
independent predictors of treatment failure. This trial included patients 
diagnosed with LC1 at a pediatric otolaryngology referral center between 2004 and 2016. All had pre-operative instrumental swallowing evaluation 
(VFSS/FEES), and were managed with a combination of conservative 
measures, IA and/or ER. These investigators collected demographics, 
symptoms, co- morbidities, VFSS/FEES results, and operative details. 
The primary outcome was symptom resolution by parental report; and 
the secondary outcome was predictors of treatment failure. A total of 88 
patients were included in the analysis, with mean age of 26 ± 25 months. 
Most presented with choking events (68 %) or recurrent pneumonias (48 
%); there were 55 IA performed and 45 ER. Of the patients who received 
IA, 19 required subsequent ER; and 95% had symptom improvement, 67 
% had complete resolution. IA had a 56 % long- term success rate, 
whereas that for ER was 85 %. Tube feeding at initial evaluation was an 
independent predictor of treatment failure (hazard ratio [HR] 11.33 [1.51 to 84.97], p = 0.018) . The authors concluded that LC1 can be effectively 
managed with a combination of IA and ER with favorable results. Failure             
 
    
          
  
 
  
        
      
          
        
           
    
       
         
   
      
    
       
     
       
     
      
 
        
  
 
     
     
      
        
       
    
    
      
        
          
           
    
            Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 35 of 53 
to respond to IA did not preclude ER, and both have their role in 
management. Patients who were tube- fed had a higher probability of 
treatment failure. 
Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Aspiration due to swallowing dysfunction in children” (Das and Boesch, 2021) states that “LTEC is one of the most common anatomic causes of aspiration. The more severe 
types (LTEC types 3 or 4) require surgical closure. Surgical treatment of 
types 1 and 2 LTEC is driven primarily by evidence of aspiration or feeding problems that fail to improve with conservative treatment, such as 
thickening of feeding. Feeding therapy and thickened feeding has a 
success rate of near 50 % for reduction of feeding and respiratory 
symptoms. When this fails, repair may be undertaken. If surgery is undertaken, the least invasive approach is injection augmentation laryngoplasty, which involves injection of a temporary material such as carboxymethylcellulose gel or gelatin sponge to partially fill the 
interarytenoid space; the effect is temporary and typically lasts a few 
months. Injection augmentation can be used as a test of effectiveness prior to surgical closure. Surgical closure is also commonly performed; and success rates are > 75 %. The closure can be done endoscopically 
for all type 1 and 2 clefts and select type 3 clefts”. 
Injection of Basic Fibroblast Growth Factor for the 
Treatment of the Vocal Fold Lesions / Paralysis 
Kanazawa and co- workers (2015) noted that severe vocal fold lesions 
such as vocal fold sulcus, scars, and atrophy induce a communication disorder due to severe hoarseness, but a treatment has not been established. Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) therapies by either 4­
time repeated local injections or regenerative surgery for vocal fold scar and sulcus have previously been reported, and favorable outcomes have been observed. In a retrospective chart review, these researchers 
modified bFGF therapy using a single of bFGF injection, which may potentially be used in the office setting. A total of 5 cases of vocal fold 
sulcus, 6 cases of scars, 7 cases of paralysis, and 17 cases of atrophy 
were treated by a local injectio n of bFGF. The injection regimen involved 
injecting 50 µg of bFGF dissolved in 0.5 ml saline only once into the superficial lamina propria using a 23-G injection needle. Two months to 3             
 
      
     
     
      
       
      
     
      
         
     
    
       
 
          
      
     
    
     
      
      
         
        
       
    
        
        
  
         
    
       
      
       
     
          
 
      
     
   
     Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 36 of 53 
months after the injection, phonological outcomes were evaluated. The 
maximum phonation time (MPT), mean airflow rate, pitch range, speech 
fundamental frequency, jitter, and Voice Handicap Index (VHI) improved significantly after the bFGF injection. Furthermore, improvement in the 
MPT was significantly greater in patients with (in increasing order) vocal 
fold atrophy, scar, and paralysis. The improvement in the MPT among all patients was significantly correlated with age; the MPT improved more greatly in younger patients. The authors concluded that regenerative treatments by bFGF injection, even a single injection, effectively improved 
vocal function in vocal fold lesions. Moreover, these researchers stated 
that further subgroup analyses in large case series are needed to determine the most suitable diseases to treat. Level of Evidence = IV. 
Ohno and associates (2016) stated that age- related vocal fold atrophy 
has become a significant voice disorder as the elderly population grows; however, several therapeutic challenges have limited attempts to impr ove 
voice quality. These investigators reported that bFGF stimulated fibroblasts to produce extracellular matrices such as HA in the lamina propria, leading to a regeneration of pliable vocal folds in animal models. In a prospective study, they examined the effectiveness of bFGF for the 
treatment of age- related vocal fold atrophy. A total of 6 patients with age-
related vocal fold atrophy underwent injection of bFGF in their vocal folds. 
Vocal outcomes and stroboscopic examinations were evaluated 1, 3, and 6 months after the injection. The outcome measures included the VHI -10 
(VHI-10), GRBAS (grade, roughness, breathiness, asthenia, strain) scale, 
MPT, the amplitude perturbation quotient (APQ), and the pitch 
perturbation quotient (PPQ). The VHI -10 was significantly improved 6 
months after bFGF injection. The GRBAS scale, MPT, APQ, and PPQ 
were also improved. Stroboscopic examinations showed significant 
improvement of glottic closure and better mucosal wave. The authors 
concluded that this was the 1st st udy to examine the regenerative effects 
of bFGF injection for the treatment of age- related vocal fold atrophy using 
the VHI- 10. Injection of bFGF significantly improved VHI -10 scores and 
glottal insufficiency for at least 6 months. Level of Evidence = IV. 
Hirano and colleagues (2021) noted that vocal fold atrophy, scar, and 
sulcus reduce the vibratory function of the vocal fold mucosa, which causes severe refractory dysphonia. These researchers had reported 
encouraging preliminary results using an intra- cordal injection of bFGF             
 
    
   
            
        
       
        
      
     
       
     
                 
     
      
      
    
        
       
       
     
 
             
      
         
        
        
        Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments - Page 37 of 53 
and showed improvement in phonatory parameters and voice. In a 
retrospective study, these investigators described their experience with 
100 cases of stiffened vocal folds that were treated with bFGF injections. 
Local injection of bFGF was carried out in 100 cases of vocal fold 
pathology, which included 43 cases of vocal fold atrophy, 41 cases with 
scar, and 16 cases with sulcus. A total of 10- ug of bFGF were injected 
into the vocal folds under topical anesthesia 4 times in each patient. 
Therapeutic outcomes were examined with MPT, VHI -10, and GRBAS 
scale. MPT, VHI -10, and GRBAS scores significantly improved in all 
pathology groups. An improvement on the VHI -10 greater than 5 points 
was observed in 82 % of atrophy cases, 78 % of scar cases, and 67 % of 
sulcus cases. Improvement on the VHI -10 was significantly better in the 
atrophy group than the scar or sulcus groups. The mild/moderate cases of scar and sulcus showed better improvement than severe cases. The 
authors concluded that the current large case series indicated positive effects of intra- cordal injection of bFGF for improvement of voice with no 
severe adverse events (AEs). The effects appeared best for cases of atrophy, while the treatment of severe scar and sulcus requires further improvement. Level of Evidence = IV. 
Muira et al (2021) 
 noted that a single injection of bFGF into the vocal 
folds of patients with glottal insufficiency has been shown to be effective for a few years; however, the long- term effect of a single injection of 
bFGF into the vocal folds has yet to be demonstrated. In this study, the 
therapeutic effect of a single injection of bFGF into the vocal folds was 
examined over several years by monitoring patients for 36 months follow ing this  treatment.  A  total  of  19 patients  with glottal  insufficiency  
received injections  of  bFGF  diluted to 20 μg/ml  in the superficial  layer  of  
the lamina propria of  the bilateral  vocal  folds.  The following parameters  
were  evaluated  at  pre-injection  baseline  and  6,  12,  18,  24,  and  36  months  
later,  and statistical  comparisons  were performed.  The parameters  
evaluated included the GRBAS  scale score;  maximum  phonation time;  
acoustic  analysis;  and glottal  wave analysis  (GWA)  and kymograph edge 
analysis (KEA)  using high- speed digital  imaging (HSDI).  The APQ  and 
PPQ  were measured by  acoustic analysis.  The mean minimum  glottal  
area during vocalization and mean minimum  distance between the vocal  
folds  were  measured  by  GWA.  The  amplitudes  of  the  bilateral  vocal  folds  
were measured by  KEA.  Post-injection,  the GRBAS  scale score 
decreased from  6 months  after  injection,  and maximum  phonation time  Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 38 of 53 
was prolonged. The mean minimum glottal area during vocalization and 
the mean minimum distance between the vocal folds calculated by GWA 
of HSDI decreased significantly after 6 months. These effects persisted 
until 36 months post -injection. APQ and PPQ derived from acoustic 
analysis tended to decrease, but not significantly. There was no clear change in the amplitudes of the bilateral vocal folds calculated by KEA of 
HSDI before and after injection. The authors concluded that the findings 
of this study suggested that the effects of a single injection of bFGF into the vocal folds lasted for 36 months. 
CPT Codes/ HCPCS Codes/ICD -10 Codes 
Information  in  the  [brackets]  below  has  been add  ed  for  clarification  
purposes. Codes requiring  a 7th character are represented by “+”  
Code Code Description 
Injections of bulking agents and medialization thyroplasty : 
CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met: 
31513 Laryngoscopy, indirect; with vocal cord injection 
31570 Laryngoscopy, direct, with injection into vocal cord(s), 
therapeutic 
31571 with operating microscope or telescope 
31591 Laryngoplasty, medialization, unilateral 
Other CPT codes related to the CPB: 
60210 -60271 Thyroidectomy 
HCPCS codes covered if selection criteria are met: 
C1878 Material for vocal cord medialization, synthetic (implantable) 
L8607 Injectable bulking agent for vocal cord medialization, 0.1 ml, 
includes shipping and necessary supp lies 
Q3031 Collagen skin test 
ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met: 
J38.01 Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx, unilateral 
J38.3 Other diseases of vocal cords [vocal cord insufficiency] 
Posterior cricoarytenoideus re-innervation and pacing : 
CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB: Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 39 of 53 
Code Code Description 
31590 Laryngeal reinnervation by neuromuscular pedicle [posterior 
cricoarytenoideus re-innervation and pacing] 
64553 Percutaneous implantation of neurostimulator electrodes; 
cranial nerve [posterior cricoarytenoideus re- innervation and 
pacing] 
C1767 Generator, neurostimulator (implantable), nonrechargeable 
C1778 Lead, neurostimulator, (implantable) 
C1816 Receiver and/or transmitter, neurostimulator (implantable) 
C1883 Adaptor/extension, pacing lead or neurostimulator lead 
(implantable) 
L8680 Implantable neurostimulator electrode, each 
L8681 Patient programmer (external) for use with implantable 
programmable neurostimulator pulse generator, replacement 
only 
L8682 Implantable neurostimulator radiofrequency receiver 
L8683 Radiofrequency transmitter (external) for use with implantable 
neurostimulator radiofrequency receiver 
L8685 Implantable neurostimulator pulse generator, single array, 
rechargeable, includes extens ion 
L8686 Implantable neurostimulator pulse generator, single array, 
non-rechargeable, includes extension 
L8687 Implantable neurostimulator pulse generator, dual array, 
rechargeable, includes extens ion 
L8688 Implantable neurostimulator pulse generator, dual array, 
non-rechargeable, includes extension 
L8689 External recharging system for battery (internal) for use with 
implanted neurostimulator, replacement only 
L8695 External recharging system for battery (external) for use with 
implanted neurostimulator, replacement only 
J38.02 P
aralysis of vocal cords and larynx, bilateral                   
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
      
 
 
 
 
       
        
 
 
        
 
      
       
  
        
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
         
         
 
 
   
 
 
         
         
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 40 of 53 
Code Code Description 
Q2026 Injection, r adiesse, 0.1 ml 
Q38.8 Ot
her congenital malformations of pharynx 
31513 L
aryngoscopy, indirect; with vocal cord injection 
31570 Laryngoscopy, direct, with injection into vocal cord(s), 
therapeutic 
31571 L
aryngoscopy, direct, with injection into vocal cord(s), 
therapeutic; with operating microscope or telescope 
31573 Laryngoscopy, flexible; with therapeutic injection(s) (e.g., 
chemodenervation agent or corticosteroid, injected 
percutaneous, transoral, or via endoscope channel), unilateral 
31574 Laryngoscopy, flexible; with injection(s) for augmentation (e.g., 
percutaneous, transoral), unilateral 
15877 S
uction assisted lipectomy; trunk 
J38.0
0 -J38.02 Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx 
J38.3 Other diseases of vocal cords [vocal cord insufficiency] 
No specifi
c code 
J38.0
0 -J38.02 Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx 
J38.3 Other diseases of vocal cords [vocal cord insufficiency] 
Q4112 C
ymetra, injectable, 1 cc 
R49.1 Aphonia 
Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 41 of 53 
Code Code Description 
31513 Laryngoscopy, with vocal cord injection 
31570 Laryngoscopy, direct, with injection into vocal cord(s), 
therapeutic; 
31571 with operating microscope or telescope 
43192 Esophagoscopy, rigid, transoral; with directed submucosal 
injection(s), any substance 
43201 Esophagoscopy, flexible, transoral; with directed submucosal 
injection(s), any substance 
43236 Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, flexible, transoral; with directed 
submucosal injection(s), any substance 
43253 Esophagoscopy, rigid, transoral; with directed submucosal 
injection(s), any substance 
64617 Chemodenervation of muscle(s); larynx, unilateral, 
percutaneous ( e.g., for spasmodic dysphonia), includes 
guidance by needle electromyography, when performed 
+95873 Electrical stimulation for guidance in conjunction with 
chemodenervation (List separately in addition to code for 
primary procedure) 
+95874 Needle electromyography for guidance in conjunction with 
chemodenervation (List separately in addition to code for primary procedure) 
J0585 I
njecti on, onabotulinumtoxina, 1 unit 
J0586 Injection, Abobotulinumtoxina, 5 units [Dysport] 
J0588 Injection, incobotulinumtoxinA, 1 unit [Xeomin] 
S2340 Chemodenervation of abductor muscle(s) of vocal cord 
S2341 Chemodenervation of adductor muscle(s) of vocal cord 
J38.0
0 -J38.02 Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx 
 
J0587 B
otulinum toxin type B, per 100 units 
Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 42 of 53 
Code Code Description 
J38.00 -J38.02 Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx 
31573 Laryngoscopy, flexible; with therapeutic injection(s) ( e.g., 
chemodenervation agent or corticosteroid, injected 
percutaneous, transoral, or via endoscope channel), unilateral 
J0702 Injection, betamethasone acetate 3 mg and betamethasone 
sodium phosphate 3 mg 
J1020 Injection, methylprednisolone acetate, 20 mg 
J1030 Injection, methylprednisolone acetate, 40 mg 
J1040 Injection, methylprednisolone acetate, 80 mg 
J1094 Injection, dexamethasone acetate, 1 mg 
J1100 Injection, dexamethasone sodium phosphate, 1 mg 
J1700 Injection, hydrocortisone acetate, up to 25 mg 
J1710 Injection, hydrocortisone sodium phosphate, up to 50 mg 
J1720 Injection, hydrocortisone sodium succinate, up to 100 mg 
J2650 Injection, prednisolone acetate, up to 1 ml 
J2920 Injection, methylprednisolone sodium succinate, up to 40 mg 
J2930 Injection, methylprednisolone sodium succinate, up to 125 mg 
J3300 Injection, triamcinolone acetonide, preservative free, 1 mg 
J3301 Injection, triamcinolone acetonide, not otherwise specified, 10 
mg 
J3302 Injection, triamcinolone diacetate, per 5 mg 
J3303 Injection, triamcinolone hexacetonide, per 5 mg 
J38.3 Other diseases of vocal cords [vocal fold lesions] 
 
Q38.8 Other congenital malformations of pharynx [velopharyngeal 
insufficiency]                   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
       
        
 
 
      
       
  
        
 
   
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
         
   
          
 
  
        
 
 
         
   
        
       
        
      
        
    Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 43 of 53 
Code Code Description 
J38.00 -J38.02 Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx 
31513 Laryngoscopy, indirect; with vocal cord injection 
31570 Laryngoscopy, direct, with injection into vocal cord(s), 
therapeutic 
31571 with operating microscope or telescope 
31573 Laryngoscopy, flexible; with therapeutic injection(s) (e.g., 
chemodenervation agent or corticosteroid, injected 
percutaneous, transoral, or via endoscope channel), unilateral 
31574 Laryngoscopy, flexible; with injection(s) for augmentation (e.g., 
percutaneous, transoral), unilateral 
Q31.8 Other congenital malformations of larynx [Posterior laryngeal 
clefts] 
The above policy is based on the following references: 
1. Al-Ali M, Anderson J. The role of steroid injection for vocal folds 
lesions in professional voice users. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
2020;49(1):50. 
2. Arviso LC, Johns MM 3rd, Mathison CC, Klein AM. Long -term 
outcomes of injection laryngoplasty in patients with potentially 
recoverable vocal fold paralysis. Laryngoscope. 
2010;120(11):2237 -2240. 
3. Belafsky PC, Postma GN. Vocal fold augmentation with calcium 
hydroxylapatite. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2004;131(4):351 ­
354.  
4. Benninger MS, Hanick A, Hicks DM. Cricothyroid muscle 
botulinum toxin injection to improve airway for bilateral 
laryngeal nerve paralysis, a case series. J Voice. 2016;30(1):96- 99. 
5. Bertroche JT, Radder M, Kallogjeri D, et al. Patient- deﬁned 
duration of beneﬁt from juvederm (hyaluronic acid) used in 
injection laryngoplasty. Laryngoscope. 2019;129(12):2744- 2747.                   
          
    
        
       
     
       
 
         
 
          
    
        
   
      
 
  
     
  
   
        
    
           
 
  
                  
       
          
    
           
  
 Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 44 of 53 
6. Brigger MT, Ashland JE, Hartnick CJ. Injection pharyngoplasty with
 
calcium hydroxylapatite for velopharyngeal insuﬃciency: Patient
 
selection and technique. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
 
2010;136(7):666 -670.  
7. Brinjikji W, Cofer SA, Lane JI. Imaging appearance of
 
dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer implant injections for 
treatment of velopharyngeal insuﬃciency. AJNR Am J  
 
Neuroradiol.  2015;36(6):1182- 1187.
  
8. Broniatowski M, Grundfest -Broniatowski S, Hadley AJ, et al. 
Improvement of respiratory compromise through abductor 
reinnervation and pacing in a patient with bilateral vocal fold 
impairment. Laryngoscope. 2010;120(1):76 -83.
 
9. Bruch JM, Kamani DV. Hoarseness in adults. UpToDate [online
 
serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed February 2015.
 
10. Cantillo- Banos E, Jurado -Ramos A, Gutierrez -Jodas J, Ariza- Vargas 
L. Vocal fold  insuﬃciency:   Medialization  laryngoplasty  vs  calcium
  
hydroxylapatite microspheres (Radiesse Voice®). Acta
  
Otolaryngol. 2013;133(3):270- 275.
  
11. Carroll TL, Rosen CA. Long -term results of calcium
 
hydroxylapatite for vocal fold augmentation. Laryngoscope.
 
2011;121(2):313 -319.
 
12. Chang HP, Chang SY. Morphology and vibration pattern of the
 
vocal cord after intracordal Teﬂon injection: Long -term results.
 
Chun Hua I Hsuch Tse C hih. 1997;60(1):6- 12.
 
13. Cho JH, Kim SY, Joo YH, et al. Eﬃcacy and safety of adjunctive
 steroid injection after microsurgical removal of benign vocal fold 
lesions. J Voice. 2017;31(5):615- 620.
 
14. Chrobok V, Pellant A, Sram F, et al. Medialization thyroplasty with a 
customized silicone implant: Clinical experience. Folia Phoniatr
 Logop. 2008;60(2):91- 96.
 
15. Cofer SA, Baas B, Strand E, Cockerill CC. Augmentation
 
pharyngoplasty for treatment of velopharyngeal insuﬃciency in
 
children: Results  with  injectable  dextranomer  and  hyaluronic
  
acid  copolymer.  Laryngoscope.  2016;126  Suppl  8:S5 -S13. 
 
16. Das S, Boesch P. Aspiration due to swallowing dysfunction in
 
children. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate;
 
reviewed July 2021.  
17. de Almeida RBS, Costa CC, Duarte PLES, et al. Surgical treatment 
applied to bilateral vocal fold paralysis in adults : Systematic
 
review. J Voice. 2021 Jan 16 [Online ahead of print].
                   
       
       
         
        
  
  
       
   
            
 
 
   
  
        
 
 
    
           
 
          
           
  
  
      
 
  
        
   
         
    
            
        
  Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 45 of 53 
18. Dejonckere PH. Teﬂon injection and thyroplasty: Objective and
 
subjective outcomes. Rev Laryungol Otol Rhinol. 1998;119(4):265­
269.  
19. Dursun G, Boynukalin S, Ozgursoy OB, Coruh I. Long -term results 
of diﬀerent treatment modalities for glottic insuﬃciency. Am J
 
Otolaryngol. 2008;29(1):7 -12.
 
20. Fang TJ, Li HY, Gliklich RE, et al. Outcomes of fat injection 
laryngoplasty in unilateral vocal cord paralysis. Arch Otolaryngol
 
Head Neck Surg. 2010;136(5):457- 462.
 
21. Friedrich G, Dikkers FG, Arens C, et al. Vocal fold scars: Current
 
concepts and future directions. Consensus report of the
 Phonosurgery Committee of the European Laryngological
 
Society. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2013;270(9):2 491-2507.
 
22. Granato F, Martelli F, Comini LV, et al. The surgical treatment of
 
unilateral vocal cord paralysis (UVCP): Qualitative review analysis
 
and meta- analysis study. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 
2019;276(10):2649 -2659.
 
23. Harries ML, Morrison M. Management of unilateral vocal cord 
paralysis  by  injection  medialization  with  teﬂon  paste. 
Quantitative  results.  Ann  Otol  Rhinol  Laryngol.  1998;107(4):332 ­ 
336.  
24. Harries ML. Unilateral vocal fold paralysis: A review of the current
 
methods of surgical rehabilitation. J Laryngol Otol. 
1996;110(2):111 -116.
 
25. Hirano S, Sugiyama Y, Kaneko M, et al. Intracordal injection of
 
basic ﬁbroblast growth factor in 100 cases of vocal fold atrophy
 
and scar. Laryngoscope. 2021;131(9):2059- 2064.
 
26. Hughes RG, Morrison M. Vocal cord medialization by
 transcutaneous injection of calcium hydroxylapatite. J Voice. 
2005;19(4):674 -678.
 
27. Isaac A, Svystun O, Johannsen W, El -Hakim H. Injection
 
augmentation and endoscopic repair of type 1 laryngeal clefts: 
Development of a management algorithm. J Otolaryngol Head
 
Neck  Surg.  2020;49(1):49.  
28. Iseli TA, Brown CL, Sizeland AM, et al. Palliative surgery for 
neoplastic unilateral vocal cord paralysis. ANZ J Surg. 
2001;71(11):672 -674.  
29. Kanazawa T, Komazawa D, Indo K, et al. Single injection of basic
 
ﬁbroblast growth factor to treat severe vocal fold lesions and
 
vocal fold paralysis. Laryngoscope. 2015;125(10):E338 -E344.
                   
           
   
 
     
   
        
  
         
  
  
    
         
 
          
   
      
 
          
 
   
           
  
 
  
          
       
    
  
          
 
     
   
            
   
  
            
        Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 46 of 53 
30. Kara HV, Karaaltin AB, Ersen E, et al. Minimally invasive injection
 
laryngoplasty in the management of unilateral vocal cord
 
paralysis after video -assisted mediastinal lymph adenectomy.
 
Wideochir Inne Tech Maloinwazyjne. 2018;13(3):388 -393.
 
31. Karpenko AN, Dworkin JP, Meleca RJ, Stachler RJ. Cymetra 
injection for unilateral vocal fold paralysis. Ann Otol Rhinol
 
Laryngol. 2003;112(11):927- 934.
 
32. Kwon TK, Buckmire R. Injection laryngoplasty for management of 
unilateral vocal fold paralysis. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck
 Surg. 2004;12(6):538 -542.
 
33. Laccourreye O, Crevier -Buchman L, Le Pimpec -Barthes F, et al.
 
Recovery of function after intracordal autologous fat injection for
 
unilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis. J Laryngol Otol. 
1998;112(11):1082 -1084.
 
34. Laccourreye O, El Sharkawy L, Holsinger FC, et al. Thyroplasty
 
type I with Montgomery implant among native French language
 speakers with unilateral laryngeal nerve paralysis. Laryngoscope.
 
2005;115(8):1411 -1417.
 
35. Laccourreye O, Paczona R, Ageel M, et al. Intracordal autologous
 
fat injection for aspiration after recurrent laryngeal nerve 
 
paralysis. Eur Arch Otolaryngol. 1999;256(9):458 -461.
 
36. Laccourreye O, Papon JF, Kania R, et al. Intracordal injection of 
autologous fat in patients with unilateral laryngeal nerve 
paralysis: Long -term results from the patient's perspective.
 
Laryngoscope. 2003;113(3):541- 545.
 
37. Lakhani R, Fishman JM, Bleach N, et al. Alternative injectable
 
materials for vocal fold medialisation in unilateral vocal fold
 
paralysis. Cochrane Databa se Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD009239.
 
38. Lam PK, Ho WK, Ng ML, Wei WI. Medialization thyroplasty for cancer -related  unilateral  vocal  fold  paralysis. Otolaryngol  Head  
 
Neck  Surg.  2007;136(3):440 -444.
  
39. Lau DP, Zhang EZ, Wong SM, et al. Correlating voice handicap 
index and quantitative videostroboscopy following injection
 laryngoplasty for unilateral vocal paralysis. Otolaryngol Head
 
Neck Surg. 2010;143(2):190 -197.
 
40. Lee SW, Kim JW, Chung CH, et al. Utility of injection laryngoplasty
 
in the management of post -thyroid ectomy vocal cord paralysis.
 
Thyroid. 2010;20(5):513 -517.
 
41. Livesay JP, Carding PN. An analysis of vocal cord paralysis before
 
and after Teﬂon injections using combined glottography. Clin
                   
  
            
  
 
           
       
      
 
     
        
    
   
       
    
 
     
       
  
          
          
      
    
          
        
  
      
   
 
         
   
        
  
           
  Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 47 of 53 
Otolaryngol. 1995;20(5):423- 427. 
42. Loh R, Phua M, Shaw CKL. Diagnosis and management of type 1 
laryngeal cleft: Systematic review. Austral J Otolaryngol. 
2019;2(5).
 
43. Lowe DA, Hoare TJ. Surgery for vocal cord paralysis and paresis 
(Protocol for Cochrane Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
 
2003;(2):CD004164.  
44. Mazzola RF, Cantarella G, Torretta S, et al. Autologous fat 
injection to face and neck: From soft tissue augmentation to
 
regenerative medicine. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital. 2011;31(2):59 ­
69.  
45. McCulloch TM, Hoﬀman HT. Medialization laryngoplasty with
 
expanded polytetraﬂuoroethylene. Surgical technique and
 
preliminary results. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1998;107(5 Pt. 
1):427- 432.  
46. Messner AH. Adenoidectomy in children: Postoperative care and 
complications. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: 
UpToDate; reviewed January 2021.
 
47. Milstein CF, Akst LM, Hicks MD, et al. Long -term eﬀects of
 
micronized Alloderm injection for unilateral vocal fold paralysis. 
Laryngoscope. 2005;115(9):1691 -1696.
 
48. Morgan JE, Zraick RI, Griﬃn AW, et al. Injection versus 
medi alization  laryngoplasty  for  the  treatment  of  unilateral  vocal  
 
fold  paralysis.  Laryngoscope.  2007;117(11):2068- 2074.
  
49. Mortensen M. Laryngeal steroid injection for vocal fold scar. Curr 
Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010;18(6):487 -491.
 
50. Miura R, Matsuzaki H , Suzuki H, et al. Eﬀect of a single injection
 
of basic ﬁbroblast growth factor into the vocal folds: A 36-month
 
clinical study. J Voice. 2021 Feb 8 [Online ahead of print].
 
51. Munin MC, Heman -Ackah YD, Rosen CA, et al. Consensus
 
statement: Using laryngeal electromyography for the diagnosis 
and treatment of vocal cord paralysis. Muscle Nerve.
 
2016;53(6):850 -855.
 
52. Nakayama M. Teﬂon vocal fold augmentation. Otolaryngol Head
 
Neck Surg. 1993;109:493 -498.
 
53. National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE). Collagen injection
 
for vocal  cord augmentation. Interventional Procedure Guidance
 
130.  London,  UK:  NICE; June  2005.  
54. Odland RM, Wigley T, Rice R. Management of unilateral vocal fold 
paralysis. Am Surg. 1995;61(5):438- 443.
                   
  
         
    
             
 
 
   
            
  
 
    
  
      
           
    
 
        
        
 
   
      
   
           
      
  
  
     
 
        
      
    
        
     
   
     
          
   Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 48 of 53 
55. Ohno S, Hirano S, Yasumoto A, et al. Outcome of regenerative
 
therapy for age -related vocal fold atrophy with basic ﬁbroblast
 
growth factor. Laryngoscope. 2016;126(8):1844 -1848.
 
56. Pearl AW, Woo P, Ostrowski R, et al. A prelim inary report on
 
micronized AlloDerm injection laryngoplasty. Laryngoscope.
 
2002;112(6):990 -996.
 
57. Peck BW, Baas BS, Cofer SA. Injection pharyngoplasty with a 
hyaluronic acid and dextranomer copolymer to treat 
velopharyngeal  insuﬃciency  in  adults.  Mayo  Clin  Proc  Innov  Qual
  
Outcomes. 2017;1(2):176- 184.
  
58. Perie S, Roubeau B, Liesenfelt I, et al. Role of medialization in the 
improvement of breath control in unilateral vocal fold paralysis. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2002;111(11):1026 -1033.
 
59. Prendes BL, Yung KC, Likhterov I, et al. Long -term eﬀects of
 
injection laryngoplasty with a temporary agent on voice quality 
 
and vocal fold position. Laryngoscope. 2012;122(10):2227- 2233.
 
60. Ramadan HH, Wax MK, Avery S. Outcome and changing cause of 
unilateral vocal cord paralysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
1998;118(2):199 -202.
 
61. Ramavat AS, Tiwana H, Banumathy N, et al. Eﬃcacy of
 
intralesional steroid injection in small benign vocal fold lesions. J 
Voice. 2019;33(5):767 -772.
 
62. Rees CJ, Mouadeb DA, Belafsky PC. Thyrohyoid vocal fold
 
augmentation with calcium hydroxyapatite. Otolaryngol Head
 
Neck Surg. 2008;138(6):743 -746.
 
63. Reiter R, Brosch S. Laryngoplasty with hyaluronic acid in patients
 
with unilateral vocal fold paralysis. J Voice. 2012;26(6):785- 91.
 
64. Remacle M, Lawson G, Delos M, et al. Correcting vocal fold
 
immobility by autologous collagen injection for voice
 
rehabilitation. A short -term study. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 
1999;108(8):788 -793.
 
65. Rosen CA, Gartner -Schmidt J, Casiano R, et al. Vocal fold
 
augmentation with calcium hydroxylapatite (CaHA). Otolaryngol
 
Head Neck Surg. 2007;136(2):198- 204.
 
66. Rosen CA, Gartner -Schmidt J, Casiano R, et al. Vocal fold
 
augmentation with calcium hydroxylapatite: Twelve -month
 
report. Laryngoscope. 2009;119(5):1033 -1041.
 
67. Rowe LD. Otolaryngology -head and neck surgery. In: Current
 
Surgical Diagnosis & Treatment. 10th Ed. LW Way, ed. Norwalk,
 
CT: Appleton & Lange; 1994.
                   
  
        
  
 
  
            
 
   
  
       
  
         
       
      
            
 
            
       
         
            
      
 
         
 
   
       
  
         
       Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 49 of 53 
68. Sagawa M, Sato M, Fujimura S, et al. Vocal fold injection of 
collagen for unilateral vocal fold paralysis caused by chest
  
diseases.  J  Cardiovasc  Surg.  1999;40(4):603 -605.
  
69. Schneider -Stickler B, Gaechter J, Bigenzahn W. Long- term results 
after external vocal fold medialization thyroplasty with titanium 
 
vocal fold medialization implant (TVFMI). Eur Arch
 
Otorhinolaryngol. 2013;270(5):1689 -1694.
 
70. Sclafani AP, Romo T 3rd, Jacono AA, et al. Evaluation of acellular
 
dermal graft in sheet (AlloDerm) and injectable (micronized
 AlloDerm) forms for  soft tissue augmentation. Clinical 
observations  and  histological analysis.   Arch  Facial Plast   Surg. 
2000;2(2):130- 136.  
71. Shen T, Damrose EJ, Morzaria S. A meta -analysis of voice
 
outcome comparing calcium hydroxylapatite injection
 laryngoplasty to silicone thyroplasty. Otolaryngol Head Neck
 
Surg. 2013;148(2):197 -208.
 
72. Sipp JA, Ashland J, Hartnick CJ. Injection pharyngoplasty with
 
calcium hydroxyapatite for treatment of velopalatal insuﬃciency.
 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008;134(3):268 -271.
 
73. Siu J, Tam S, Fung K. A comparison of outcomes in interventions
 
for unilateral vocal fold paralysis: A systematic review. 
Laryngoscope. 2016;126(7):1616 -1624.
 
74. Song PC, Sung CK, Franco RA Jr. Voice outcomes after endoscopic
 
injection laryngoplasty with hyaluronic acid stabilized gel.
 
Laryngoscope.  2010;120  Suppl  4:S199.  
75. Storck C, Brockmann M, Schnellmann E, et al. Functional 
outcome of vocal fold  medialization  thyroplasty with a 
hydroxyapatite  implant. Laryngoscope.  2007;117(6):1118- 1122.
  
76. Sulica L, Rosen CA, Postma GN, et al. Current practice in injection
 
augmentation of the vocal folds: Indications, treatment 
principles, techniques, and complications. Laryngoscope. 
2010;120(2):319 -325.
 
77. Tirado Y, Lewin JS, Hutcheson KA, Kupferman ME. Oﬃce -based 
injection laryngoplasty in the irradiated larynx. Laryngoscope. 
2010;120(4):703 -706.
 
78. Tran HV, Tran -Le PT, Nguyen TV. Treatment of vocal cord
 
paralysis by autologous fat injection: Our experience with 41 
patients. Clin Otolaryngol. 2019;44(1):76 -80.
 
79. Tucker HM. Direct autogenous fat implantation for augmentation
 
of the vocal folds. J Voice. 2001;15(4):565 -569.
                   
          
  
         
        
       
            
   
      
  
       
    
            
          
 
  
  
         
 
        
 
  
  
   
        
 
           
 
          
  
 Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 50 of 53 
80. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Center for Devices and 
Radiologic Health (CDRH). MAUDE Adverse Event Report: Q-MED
 
AB. Restylane   injectable   gelinjectable   dermal ﬁller. Silver   Spring, 
 
MD:  FDA;  October   15,  2007.
  
81. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Radiesse laryngeal
 
implant. Summary of safety and eﬀectiveness. 510(k) No.
 
K070090. Silver Spring, MD: FDA; March 1, 2007.
 
82. Umeno H, Shirouzu H, Chitose S, Nakashima T. Analysis of voice
 
function following autologous fat injection for vocal fold
 
paralysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2005;132(1):103 -107.
 
83. Upton DC, Johnson M, Zelazny SK, Dailey SH. Prospective 
evaluation of oﬃce -based injection laryngoplasty with hyaluronic
 
acid gel. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2013;122(9):541 -546.
 
84. van den Broek EMJM, Heijnen BJ, Hendriksma M, et al. Bilateral 
vocal  fold  injection  with  autologous  fat  in  patients  with  vocal  fold 
atrophy with or without sulcus. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol.  
 
2019;276(7):2007 -2013.
  
85. van den Broek EMJM, Heijnen BJ, Hendriksma M, et al. Bilateral 
trial vocal fold injection with hyaluronic acid in patients with
 vocal fold atrophy wi th or without sulcus. Eur Arch
 
Otorhinolaryngol. 2019;276(5):1413 -1422.
 
86. Verma SP, Dailey SH. Oﬃce -based injection laryngoplasty for the 
management of unilateral vocal fold paralysis. J Voice.
 
2014;28(3):382- 386.  
87. Vila PM, Bhatt NK, Paniello RC. Early -injection laryngoplasty may
 
lower risk of thyroplasty: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
 Laryngoscope. 2018;128(4):935- 940.
 
88. Wang CC, Chang MH, Wang CP, et al. Laryngeal electromyography -guided  hyaluronic  acid  vocal  fold  injection  for
  
unilateral vocal fold paralysis  -- preliminary results. J Voice. 
2012;26(4):506 -514.
  
89. Wang C-C, Wu S -H, Tu Y -K, et al. Hyaluronic acid injection
 
laryngoplasty for unilateral vocal fold paralysis --A systematic
 
review and meta -analysis. Cells. 2020;9(11 ):2417.
 
90. Woisard V, Liu X, Bes MC, Simonetta -Moreau M. Botulinum toxin
 
injection in laryngeal dyspnea. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 
2017;274(2):909 -917.
 
91. Yeung JC, Balakrishnan K, Cheng ATL, et al. International Pediatric
 
Otolaryngology Group: Consensus guidelines on the diagnosis
 
and management of type I laryngeal clefts. Int J Pediatr
                   
  
           
        
  
  
   
           
       Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 51 of 53 
Otorhinolaryngol. 2017;101:51- 56. 
92. Yung KC, Likhterov I, Courey MS. Eﬀect of temporary vocal fold 
injection medialization on the rate of permanent medialization
 
laryngoplasty in unilateral vocal fold paralysis patients. 
Laryngoscope. 2011;121(10):2191- 2194.
 
93. Zeitels SM, Casiano RR, Gardner GM, et al. Management of 
common  voice  problems:  Committee  report.  Otolaryngol  Head  
 
Neck  Surg.  2002;126(4):333 -348.
  
94. Zhang HY, Xu W, Lu ZH, et al. Vocal fold augmentation by
 
injection of autologous fascia and fat. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou
 
Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011;46(4):269- 274.
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
        
                
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 52 of 53 
Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan benefits and 
constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna 
or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Polic y Bulletin may be 
updated and therefore is subject to change. 
Copyright © 2001- 2022 Aetna Inc.                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
        
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Vocal Cord Paralysis / Insufficiency Treatments -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 53 of 53 
AETNA BETTER HEALTH® OF PENNSYLVANIA 
Amendment to
 
Aetna Clinical Policy Bulletin Number: 0253 Vocal Cord Paralysis / 
Insufficiency Treatments
 
Any requests for services that do not meet criteria set forth will be evaluated as a program exception on a case -by-case basis 
revised 04/28/2022 