-->
Amivantamab-vmjw (Rybrevant)
Clinical Policy Bulletins
Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins
Print 
opens a dialog
Share 
opens in a new window
Number: 0995
Table Of Contents
Policy
Applicable CPT / HCPCS / ICD-10 Codes
Background
References
Policy
Note
: Requires Precertification. 
Precertification of amivantamab-vmjw (Rybrevant) is required of all Aetna participating providers and members in applicable
plan designs. For precertification of amivantamab-vmjw (Rybrevant), call (866) 752-7021 (commercial), (866) 503-0857
(Medicare), or fax (888) 267-3277. 
I
. 
Criteria for Initial Approval
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC)
Aetna considers amivantamab-vmjw (Rybrevant) medically necessary for treatment of NSCLC when 
all
 of the following
criteria are met:
A
. 
Member has locally
 
advanced or metastatic disease; 
and
B
. 
Member has EGFR exon 20 insertion mutations; 
and
C
. 
Disease has progressed on or after platinum-based chemotherapy; 
and
D
. 
The requested medication is used as a single agent.
Aetna considers all other indications as experimental and investigational.
II
. 
Continuation of Therapy
Aetna considers continuation of amivantamab-vmjw (Rybrevant) therapy medically necessary in members requesting
reauthorization for an indication listed in Section I when there is no evidence of unacceptable toxicity or disease
progression while on the current regimen.
Dosage and Administration
Amivantamab-vmjw (Rybrevant) is available as 350 mg/7 mL (50 mg/mL) solution in a single-dose vial for intravenous
infusion.
Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC)
The recommended doses of Rybrevant are based on baseline body weight as the following:
For less than 80 kg, the recommended dose is 1050 mgFor greater than or equal to 80 kg, the recommended dose is 1400 mg.
Rybrevant is administered weekly (total of 4 doses) during weeks 1 to 4, with the initial dose as split infusion in week 1 on
day 1 and day 2. During weeks 2 to 4, the infusion is on day 1,  then given every 2 weeks starting at week 5 until disease
progression or unacceptable toxicity.
Source: Janssen, 2021a
Table:
CPT Codes / HCPCS Codes / ICD-10 Codes
Information in the [brackets] below has been added for clarification purposes.   Codes requiring a
7th character are represented by "+"
 
:
Information in the [brackets] below has been added for clarification purposes.   Codes requiring
a 7th character are represented by "+"
:
Code
Code Description
Other CPT codes related to the CPB
:
96413 -
hyphen
 96417
Chemotherapy administration
HCPCS codes covered if selection criteria are met
:
J9061
Injection, amivantamab-
hyphen
vmjw, 2 mg
ICD-
hyphen
10 codes covered if selection criteria are met
:
C34.00 -
hyphen
 C34.92
Malignant neoplasm of bronchus and lung [non-
hyphen
small cell lung cancer]
Background
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-Approved Indications 
Rybrevant is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with epidermal
growth receptor factor (EGFR) exon 20 insertion mutations, as detected by an FDA-approved test, whose disease has
progressed on or after platinum-based chemotherapy.
Amivantamab-vmjw is available as Rybrevant (Janssen Biotech, Inc.) and is a low-fucose human immunoglobulin GI-based
bispecific antibody that binds the extracellular domains of epidermal growth receptor factor (EGFR) and mesenchymal-
epithelial transition (MET). In 
in vitro
 and 
in vivo
 studies, amivantamab-vmjw was able to disrupt EGFR and MET signaling
functions through blocking ligand binding and, in exon 20 insertion mutation models, degradation of EGFR and MET. Tumor
cells with EGFR and MET on their surface are targeted for destruction by immune effector cells through antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) and trogocytosis mechanisms. Amivantamab-vmjw is produced by mammalian cell line (Chinese
Hamster Ovary [CHO] using recombinant DNA technology (Janssen, 2021a).
Per the prescribing information, amivantamab-vmjw (Rybrevant) carries the following warnings and precautions:
Infusion-related reactions (IRR): In clinical trial, IRR was noted in 66% of patients treated with Rybrevant and 97% of
the reported IRRs were Grade 1 to 2, 2.2% were Grade 3, and 0.4% were Grade 4;
Interstitial lung disease (ILD)/pneumonitis: In clinical trial, ILD/pneumonitis was noted in 3.3% of patients treated with
Rybrevant, with 0.7% of patients experiencing Grade 3 ILD/pneumonitis;
Dermatologic adverse reactions: In clinical trial, rash was noted in 74% of patients treated with Rybrevant, including
Grade 3 rash in 3.3% of patients;
Ocular toxicity: The occurrence of ocular toxicity including keratitis, dry eye symptoms, conjunctival redness, blurred
vision, visual impairment, ocular itching, and uveitis has been noted with Rybrevant therapy; keratitis occurred in 0.7%
of patients and uveitis occurred in 0.3% of patients with all events being Grade 1 to 2;
Embryo-fetal toxicity.
The most frequent adverse reactions (≥20%) were rash, IRR, paronychia, musculoskeletal pain, dyspnea, nausea, fatigue,
edema, stomatitis, cough, constipation, and vomiting (Janssen, 2021a).The most frequent Grade 3 or 4 laboratory abnormalities (≥2%) were decreased lymphocytes, decreased albumin,
decreased phosphate, decreased potassium, increased alkaline phosphatase, increased glucose, increased gamma-
glutamyl transferase, and decreased sodium(Janssen, 2021a).
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC)
Globally, lung cancer is the most prevalent cancer type and the leading cause cancer-related mortality, of which, non-small
cell lung cancer is responsible for 80% to 85% of all lung cancers per the American Cancer Society. An estimated 2% to 3%
of patients with non-small cell lung cancer will have epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) exon 20 insertion mutations,
which are a group of mutations on a protein that result in rapid cell proliferation and ensuing cancer spread. EGFR exon 20
insertion mutations are the third most prevalent type of EGFR mutation (FDA, 2021).
On May 21, 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Rybrevant (amivantamab-vmjw) for the treatment
of adult patients with locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) exon 20 insertion mutations, as detected by an FDA-approved test, whose disease has progressed on or
after platinum-based chemotherapy. The FDA granted accelerated approval based on Priority Review and Breakthrough
Therapy designation for the non-small cell lung cancer indication. The FDA approval was based on supporting data from the
ongoing Phase I CHRYSALIS study (Janssen, 2021b).
The Phase I CHRYSALIS study consisted of a multicenter, open-label, multi-cohort clinical trial which included patients with
locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with EGFR exon 20 insertion mutations whose disease had progressed on or after
platinum-based chemotherapy. Rybrevant was administered as an intravenous infusion at 1050 mg (for patient baseline
body weight < 80 kg) or 1400 mg (for patient baseline body weight ≥80 kg) once weekly for 4 weeks, then every 2 weeks
thereafter until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. The efficacy of Rybrevant was evaluated in a population of 81
patients with NSCLC with EGFR exon 20 insertion mutation with measurable disease who received prior platinum-based
chemotherapy. The primary efficacy outcome measure was overall response rate (ORR) with an additional efficacy outcome
measure as duration of response (DOR). The confirmed ORR was 40% (95% confidence interval [CI], 29% to 51%), with
3.7% achieving complete responses (CR) and 36% having partial responses (PR). The median DOR was 11.1 months (95%
CI, 6.9 months to not estimable) with 63% of patients having a DOR of 6 months or more (Janssen, 2021a).
References
The above policy is based on the following references:
1
. 
Janssen Biotech, Inc. Rybrevant (amivantamab-vmjw) injection, for intravenous use. Prescribing Information. Horsham,
PA: Janssen; revised December 2021a.
2
. 
Janssen Biotech, Inc. Rybrevant (amivantamab-vmjw) receives FDA approval as the first targeted treatment for
patients with non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR exon 20 insertion mutations. Press Release. Horsham, PA:
Janssen; May 21, 2021b.
3
. 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Amivantamab-vmjw. NCCN Drugs and Biologics Compendium,
Plymouth Meeting, PA: NCCN; March 2022.
4
. 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). FDA approves first targeted therapy for subset of non-small cell lung
cancer. FDA News Release. Silver Spring, MD: FDA; May 21, 2021.
Policy History
Last Review
 
 07/27/2022
Effective: 08/10/2021
Next Review: 05/25/2023
Review History
Definitions
Additional Information
Clinical Policy Bulletin Notes
 
opens a dialog
 
 
opens a dialog
 
 
opens a dialog
 
 
opens a dialog
Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan
benefits and constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial,general description of plan or program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care
services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in
private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for
medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be updated and therefore is subject to change.
 
Glossary
Aetna Mobile App
Careers
Accessibility Services
Terms of Use
Investor Info
FAQs
Program Provisions
Interest-Based Ads Policy
Legal Notices
Plan Disclosures
Nondiscrimination Notice
Site Map
Privacy Center
State Directory
Copyright 
©
 2001-2023 Aetna Inc.
Language services can be provided by calling the number on your member ID card. For additional language assistance:
Español
  
Ti
ế
ng Vi
ệ
t
   
Tagalog
Pусский
ﺔﻴﺑﺮﻌﻟا
Kreyòl
Français
Polski
Português
Italiano
Deutsch
   
ﯽﺳرﺎﻓ
Other Languages…
close popup
You are now leaving the Aetna website
.
Links to various non-Aetna sites are provided for your convenience only. Aetna Inc. and its subsidiary companies are not responsible or liable for the
content, accuracy, or privacy practices of linked sites, or for products or services described on these sites.
Continue 