   
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis  - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
        
        
        
           
 
   
 
 
 
       
 
       
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 | … Page 1 of 30 
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
(CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy
(RSD): Diagnosis 
POLICY HISTORY 
Last Review: 03/09/2022 
Effective:  04/10/1997 
Next Review: 01/26/2023 
Review History 
Deﬁnitions 
Additional Information 
Clinical Policy Bulletin 
Notes  Number: 0147 
POLICY 
*Please see amendment for Pennsylvania Medicaid at the end of this CPB. 
Aetna considers the following tests experimental and investigational for 
the diagnosis of reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD), also known as 
complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS), because there is insufficient 
scientific evidence to support the effectiveness of these approaches: 
Antioxidant  proﬁle   (e.g.,  enzymatic  activities  consisting  of  serum  
glutathion  peroxidase  (GPX),  glutathione  S-transferase  (GST),  and   
superoxide  dismutase  (SOD)  
Biomarkers of inﬂammation (e.g., autoantibodies, calcitonin gene-
related peptide [CGRP], CD8+ T lymphocytes, CD14+CD16+ 
monocytes, interleukin -6 [IL -6], mast cell numbers, microRNA 
[miRNA], soluble interleukin -2 receptor [sIL-2R], substance P [SP], 
and tumor necrosis factor -alpha [TNF -α]) 
Bone SPECT/CT  
Computed tomography (CT) (including high -resolution 
peripheral quantitative CT for evaluation of CRPS -associated 
osteopenia) 
Determination of highly unsaturated fatty acids and trans fatty 
acid status      
 
 
 
            
     
 
 
 
 
        
           
         
        
        
         Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 2 of 30 
DNA  methylation  proﬁles   (for  predicting  the  development  of  CRPS 
after traumatic  injury) 
  
Electronic nose (Aeonose)  for  diagnosis of CRPS 
  
Gene  expression  proﬁling   (e.g.,  CREB‑binding  protein  (CREBBP), 
  
early region 1A  binding  protein  p300 (EP300), human leukocyte  
 
antigen (HLA) family genes such as HLA ‑DQB1 and HLA ‑DRB1, 
  
integrin  alpha  M,  signal  transducer  and  activator  of  transcription 
  
(STAT)3, and  STAT5A) 
  
Intravenous phentolamine (Regitine) 
  
Laser Doppler ﬂowmetry   
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)  
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and positron emission  
tomography  (PET)  of  brain  metabolites  and  peripheral  biomarkers  
of  inﬂammation   
Measurement  of  dermal  nerve  ﬁber  and  mast  cell  density,  and 
proximity of mast cells to nerve  ﬁbers  
Measurement of serum anti -neuronalantibodies/autoantibodies  
Musculoskeletal ultrasonography  
Plain   ﬁlm  radiography   
Positron  emission tomography (PET) 
  
Small  non-coding  RNAs  (microRNAs)  as  diagnostic  and  prognostic 
  
biomarkers for  CRPS 
  
Thermography. 
  
For  autonomic  testing  for  reflex  sympathetic  dystrophy  (e.g.,  quantitative  
sudomotor  axon  reflex  test  (QSART),  resting  sweat  output  (RSO),  and 
resting skin t  emperature (RST)), see CPB 0485 - Autonomic Testing  /  
Sudomotor Tests (../400_499/0485.html) .  
See also CPB 0447 -Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) / Reﬂex  
Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Treatments (../400_499/0447.html) . 
BACKGROUND  
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD), one of the major causes of 
disability, is a general descriptive term for a set of symptoms and signs 
without any implication of pathophysiology or etiology. It is characterized 
by diffused burning pain, allodynia (pain on light touch), and autonomic 
dysfunction with sweating, temperature change, and redness or cyanotic 
mottling. Reflex sympathetic dystrophy occurs in adults and children,      
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 3 of 30 
          
           
     
      
     
 
    
         
       
          
        
        
          
         
        
           
     
 
        
               
        
           
             
      
        
  
  
  and usually develops in a limb after a relatively minor injury. It can be 
temporary, permanent, episodic, or migratory, and may occur in one area 
or mor e. In an attempt to clarify the subject, the International 
Association for the Study of Pain listed 4 diagnostic criteria for RSD. All 
4 of the following criteria must be met for the diagnosis of RSD to be 
established: 
(i) the presence of an initiating nox ious event, or a cause of 
  
immobilization; (ii) continuing pain, allodynia, or hyperalgesia with 
  
which the pain is disproportionate to the initiating event; (iii)  
 
conﬁrmation at some time of edema, changes in blood ﬂow, or   
abnormal  sudomotor  activity  in  the  area  of  the  pain  such  as  changes 
  
in skin temperature, skin color, or sweating; and (iv) the absence of  
 
other  conditions  that  would  account  for  the  pain  and  dysfunction. 
  
Despite intensive clinical investigations in the past 5 decades, the 
diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for RSD remain controversial. In 
 
this regard, some researchers have advocated the use of systemic 
 
sympathetic blockade with phentolamine as a diagnostic test for this 
 
condition. Phentolamine mesylate (Regitine) is a short -acting alp ha­
adrenergic blocking agent that acts at both alpha -1 and alpha -2 
adrenergic receptor sites. As a test to diagnose RSD, patients are 
 
usually given an intravenous infusion of 25 to 75 mg phentolamine for 20 
 
mins. Pain relief following phentolamine administration is then taken as a 
confirmation of RSD. However, the value of the phentolamine test in 
 
diagnosing RSD has been challenged by many investigators. 
 
In a recent review on complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) (Wasner 
 
et al, 2003), the phentolamine test is not listed as a diagnostic test for this
 
syndrome. Furthermore, Atkins (2003) stated that CRPS is a clinical 
 
diagnosis and there is no single diagnostic test. Laser Doppler flowmetry 
 
has been used evaluate blood flow in patients with CRPS because it has
 
been suggested that CRPS may be associated with vascular 
 
disturbances (e.g., a loss of cutaneous sympathetic vasoconstrictor 
 
activity). Vital capillaroscopy is a technique using Doppler flowmetry to 
gauge anatomical vascular mapping and capillary blood flow in the 
affected extremity. 
      
 
       
        
      
          
         
           
         
         
         
        
     
          
            
        
          
   
        
     
        
          
     
   
 
         
       
        
      
  
 
           
         
          
        
       
 
   
      
         Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 4 of 30 
Wasner et al (1999) examined cutaneous sympathetic vasoconstrictor 
innervation by laser Doppler flowmetry in 2 patients with CRPS and 1 
normal control subject. This study was design ed to investigate the 
pathophysiology of CRPS. However, the study did not demonstrate how 
well laser Doppler flowmetry would perform in establishing or excluding 
the diagnosis of CRPS. Nor did this study show how management is 
influenced and clinical outcomes are improved in patients with symptoms 
of CRPS. Baron and Maier (1996) assessed the role of the sympathetic 
nervous system in patients with RSD of the hand using laser Doppler 
flowmetry. Cutaneous blood flow, skin resistance and skin temperature 
were m easured at the affected and contralateral hands. These 
investigators found that (i) side diﬀerences  in skin temperature and 
blood ﬂow are no static descriptors in RSD. They are dynamic values 
depending critically on environmental temperature. Thus, they have 
to be interpreted with care when deﬁning  reliable diagnostic criteria,, 
and (ii) vascular disturbances in RSD are not due to constant over -
activity of sympathetic vasoconstrictor neurons. Changes in vascular 
sensitivity to cold temperature and circulating catecholamines may be 
responsible for vascular abnormalities. Alternatively, RSD may be 
associated with an abnormal (side different) reflex pattern of sympathetic 
vasoconstrictor neurons due to thermoregulatory and emotional sti muli 
generated in the central nervous system. 
Gorodkin et al (2004) assessed microvascular endothelial function in 
patients with CRPS compared with healthy controls, as measured by 
iontophoresis of vasoactive chemicals and laser Doppler imaging. These 
researchers found that CRPS was not associated with impairment of 
microvascular endothelial function. 
Laser Doppler flowmetry has been used as a research tool in quantifying 
blood perfusion in persons with microvascular disease due to diabetes 
and other vascular conditions. However, there is insufficient evidence of 
the clinical value of this study in improving the management of patients 
with diabetes such that clinical outcomes areimproved. 
Thermography involves the use of an infrared thermometer to measure 
several symmetrical points on the affected and contralateral extremity, 
making comparisons between the 2 extremities. In general, a difference      
 
 
        
     
        
     
        
        
        
         
           
  
 
        
         
       
          
        
          
          
         
         
   
        
            
        
         
  
 
          
        
        
           
      
        Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 5 of 30 
of  0.5  degrees  C  is  considered  mildly  asymmetrical,  and  a difference of  
1.0 degrees  C  is  considered  significant.  Although asymmetries in 
temperature  have  been  found  in  persons  with  CRPS,  it  has  been  reported  
that  a  lack  of  asymmetry  does  not  exclude  the diagnosis  (Rho et  al,  
2002).  
N
iehof et al (2007) found that, although observer assessment of 
thermographic images may distinguish bet ween CRPS1 patients and 
healthy controls, the reliability and repeatability of this assessment was 
"rather low." This study aimed at evaluating the sensitivity, specificity, 
reliability and repeatability of observer assessment of thermographic 
images taken from CRPS 1. A computer program was developed to let 
observers rate the difference between randomly presented thermographic 
images of pairs of hands of individuals. The investigators reported that the sensitivity was 71 % and the specificity 85 %. The repeatability was 
0.5267 and the reliability was 0.4967. 
Gradl and colleagues (2003) reported that thermography had poor sensitivity and specificity for CRPS1. The investigators studied the value 
of clinical evaluation, radiography and thermography in the early 
diagnosis of traumatic CRPS1. A total of 158 patients with distal radial 
fractures were followed- up for 16 weeks after trauma. Apart from a 
detailed clinical examination 8 and 16 weeks after trauma, thermography 
and bilateral radiographs of both hands were carried out. At the end of 
the observation period 18 patients (11 %) were clinically identified as CRPS1. Sixteen weeks after trauma easy differentiation between normal 
fracture patients and CRPS1 patients was possible. The investigators 
reported that, 8 weeks after distal radial fracture, clinical evaluation showed a sensitivity of 78 % and a specificity of 94 %. On the other hand, thermography (58 %) and bilateral radiography (33 %) revealed poor sensitivities. The specificity was high for radiography (91 %) and 
again poor for thermography (66 %). 
Schürmann et al (2007) compared several imaging studies in diagnosing 
post-traumatic CRPS. A total of 158 consecutive patients with distal 
radial fracture were followed- up for 16 weeks after trauma. A detailed 
clinical examination was carried out 2, 8, and 16 weeks after trauma in conjunction with bilateral thermography, plain radiographs of the hand 
skeleton, 3-phase bone scans (TPBSs), and contrast -enhanced magnetic      
 
    
         
            
     
         
          
            
          
             
          
        
        
       
         
         
       
        
         
             
           
  
 
           
     
        
       
             
          
          
          
         
      
    
    
       
         
   
   
         Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 6 of 30 
resonance imaging (MRI). All imaging procedures were assessed 
blinded. At the end of the observation period 18 patients (11 %) were clinically identified as having CRPS I and 13 patients (8 %) revealed an 
incomplete clinical picture which were defined as CRPS borderline 
cases. The sensitivity of all diagnostic procedures used was poor and decreased between the 1st and the last examinations (thermography: 45 
% to 29 %; TPBS: 19 % to 14 %; MRI: 43 % to 13 %; bilateral radiographs: 36 %). In contrast a high specificity was observed in the TPBS and MRI at the 8th and 16th-week examinations (TPBS: 96 %, 100 
%; MRI: 78 %, 98 %) and for bilateral radiographs 8 weeks after trauma (94 %). Thermography presented a fair specificity that improved from the 
2nd to the 16th week (50 % to 89 %). The authors concluded that the poor sensitivity of all tested procedures combined with a reasonable specificity produced a low positive predictive value (17 % to 60 %) and a moderate negative predictive value (79 % to 86 %). These results suggested that those procedures cannot be used as screening tests. 
Imaging methods are not able to reliably differentiate between normal 
post-traumatic changes and changes due to CRPS I. Clinical findi ngs 
remain the gold standard for the diagnosis of CRPS I and the procedures 
described above may serve as additional tools to establish the diagnosis 
in doubtful cases. 
Niehof et al (2008) evaluated the validity of skin surface temperature 
recordings, based on various calculation methods applied to the thermographic data, to diagnose acute CRPS1 fracture patients. 
Thermographic recordings of the palmar/plantar side and dorsal side of both hands or feet were made on CRPS1 patients and in control fracture 
patients with/without and without complaints similar to CRPS1 (total in the 
3 subgroups = 120) just after removal of plaster. Various calculation methods applied to the thermographic data were compared using receiver 
operating characteristics analysis to obtain indicators of diagnostic value. 
There were no significant differences in demographic data and 
characteristics among the 3 subgroups. The most pronounced 
differences among the subgroups were vasomotor signs in the CRPS1 
patients. The involved side in CRPS1 patients was often warmer 
compared with the non-involved extremity. The difference in temperature 
between the involved site and the non- involved extremity in CRPS1 
patients significantly differed from the difference in temperature between the contralateral extremities of the 2 control groups. The largest      
 
      
    
          
    
      
         
           
        
        
     
         
     
         
           
          
 
 
      
          
             
        
         
          
    
         
       
        
        
    
         
           
            
          
 
      
          
         
           
           Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 7 of 30 
temperature difference between extremities was found in CRPS1 
patients. The difference in temperature recordings comparing the 
palmar/plantar and dorsal recording was not significant in any group. The 
sensitivity and specificity varied considerably between the various calculation methods used to calculate temperature difference between extremities. The highest level of sensitivity was 71 % and the h ighest 
specificity was 64 %; the highest positive predictive value reached a value 
of 35 % and the highest negative predictive 84 %, with a moderate 0.60 greater than or equal to area under the curve less than or equal to 0.65. The authors concluded that t he validity of skin surface temperature 
recordings under resting conditions to discriminate between acute CRPS1 
fracture patients and control fracture patients with/without complaints is limited. Furthermore, in a review on CRPS, Albazaz and colleagues (2008) stated that no specific diagnostic test is available. Thus, diagnosis 
is based mainly on history, clinical examination, and supportive laboratory 
findings. 
Krumova et al (2008) evaluated long- term skin temperature changes 
under everyday circumstances in 22 patients with CRPS, 18 patients with 
limb pain of other origin and 23 healthy controls. The asymmetries in skin 
temperature and oscillation number (Q Oscill), the percentage of assessed time with a-synchron temperature changes on both body sides 
and the determination coefficient of the individual regression (r2 id) were 
compared between the groups. Patients with CRPS differed significantly from healthy controls in nearly all parameters. Minor differences between 
both patient groups were found regarding the percentage of assessed time with side difference greater than 2 degrees C (DeltaT2). However, 
both patient groups differed significantly in parameters characterizing the 
skin temperature dynamics. A sum score (2 *Q Oscill +r2 id +DeltaT2) 
allowed diagnosing CRPS with a specificity of 67 % versus patients with other painful diseases and 79 % versus healthy controls (sensitivity: 73 
%, and 94 %, respectively) and reflected the severity of the dysfunction in 
CRPS better than the mean skin temperature side differences alone. 
Cohen and Raja (2009) stated that measurement of skin temperature dynamics differentiated between CRPS and arm pain secondary to other 
etiologies with a sensitivity of 73 % and a specificity of 67 %. Although the technique Krumova and colleagues (2008) used is more practical than 
those previously described, it is still too onerous for patients and      
 
    
         
         
 
          
          
             
        
           
        
       
         
   
    
       
        
        
      
         
       
       
            
        
       
           
     
 
         
        
             
     
    
         
      
   
       
         
      
     Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 8 of 30 
physicians to routinely employ. These researchers anticipate that 
improved identification of pain mechanisms will translate into better 
treatment outcomes, but this hypothesis remains to be tested. 
In a pilot study, Ramsden and colleagues (2010) compared the omega- 6 
(n-6) and omega-3 (n-3) highly unsaturated fatty acids (HUFA), and trans 
fatty acid (trans FA) status of CRPS patients to pain-free controls. A total 
of 20 patients that met the Budapest research diagnostic criteria for 
CRPS and 15 pain- free control subjects were included in this study. 
Fasting plasma fatty acids were collected from all participants. In CRPS 
patients, pain was assessed using the McGill Pain Questionnaire- Short 
Form. In addition, results from the perceived disability (Pain Disability 
Index), pain- related anxiety (Pain Anxiety Symptom Scale Short Form), 
depression (Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale Short Form), and quality of life (Short Form -36 [SF -36]) were evaluated. 
Compared with controls, CRPS patients reported elevated concentrations 
of n-6 HUFA and trans FA. No differences in n- 3 HUFA concentrations 
were observed. Plasma concentrations of the n- 6 HUFA 
docosatetraenoic acid were inversely correlated with the "vitality" section 
of the SF -36. Trans FA concentrations positi vely correlated with pain -
related disability and anxiety. The authors concluded that these preliminary data suggest that elevated n-6 HUFA and trans FA may play a 
role in CRPS pathogenesis. They stated that these findings should be replicated, and more research is needed to explore the clinical significance of low n- 6 and trans FA diets with or without concurrent n- 3 
HUFA supplementation, for the management of CRPS. 
Ringer and colleagues (2012) stated that to date, no attempt has been made to investigate the agreement between qualitative bone scintigraphy 
(BS) and the presence of CRPS 1 and the agreement between a negative 
BS in the absence of CRPS 1. These investigators summarized the 
existing evidence quantifying the concordance of qualitative BS in the 
presence or absence of clinical CRPS 1. They searched Medline, 
Embase, Dare and the Cochrane Library and screened bibliographies of all included studies; and selected diagnostic studies investigating the association between qualitative BS results and the clinical diagnosis of 
CRPS 1. The minimum requirement for inclusion was enough information 
to fill the 2 -by-2 tables. A total of 12 studies met inclusion criteria and 
were included in the meta- analysis. The pooled mean sensitivity of      
 
      
       
          
             
         
              
          
         
        
     
 
  
 
    
    
      
            
       
       
        
    
    
     
     
   
      
        
            
       
         
         
           
           
    
 
  Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 9 of 30 
twelve 2 -by-2 tables was 0.87 (95 % confidence interval [CI]: 0.68 to 0.97) 
and specificity was 0.69 (95 % CI: 0.47 to 0.85). The pooled mean 
sensitivity for the subgroup with clearly defined diagnostic criteria (seven 
2-by-2 tables) was 0.80 (95 % CI: 0.44 to 0.95) and specificity was 0.73 
(95 % CI: 0.40 to 0.91). The authors concluded that based on the findings of this study, clinicians must be advised that a positive BS is not 
necessarily concordant with presence of absence or CRPS 1. Moreover, 
they noted that given the moderate level of concordance between a positive BS in the absence of clinical CRPS 1, discordant results potentially impede the diagnosis of CRPS 1. 
Antioxidant Proﬁle 
Baykal et l (2014) stated that the mechanism and pathogenesis of CRPS 
still remains unknown. Some findings indicating oxidative stress have been reported. These researchers examined the role of oxidative stress in patients with CRPS. A total of 20 patients (13 women and 7 men) with CRPS and 20 age- and s ex-matched healthy controls were enrolled in 
this study. Complex regional pain syndrome was diagnosed according to the modified International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) criteria. These investigators evaluated demographic, clinical and laborat ory characteristics of the patients. Antioxidant enzymatic activities 
consisting of serum glutathion peroxidase (GPX), glutathione S ­
transferase (GST) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activities were measured using appropriate methods and compared with heal thy 
controls. The mean age of the patients was 39.5 years and the mean duration of symptoms was 5.5 months. Complex regional pain syndrome developed after a traumatic event in 90 % of patients. In 10 % of patients 
there were no traumatic events; GPX, GST and SOD levels were 
significantly higher in patients with CRPS than healthy controls (p = 0.036, p = 0.016, and p = 0.012, respectively). The authors concluded that their findings suggested a possible role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of CRPS. The role of antioxidant profile in the diagnosis of 
CRPS has yet to be established. 
Musculoskeletal Ultrasonography      
 
       
   
        
         
      
      
      
         
         
        
        
      
       
      
      
  
 
  
 
       
        
        
   
      
          
        
        
         
           
          
         
              
           
            
     
 
  Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 10 of 30 
Vas and Pai (2016) noted that musculoskeletal ultrasonography (MSK­
US) can identify myofascial structural lesions. In a retro spective study, 
these investigators described the observational findings of US data of muscles from limbs affected with neuropathic pain in 7 patients and compared them with muscles affected with CRPS- 1 in 7 patients. These 
researchers highlighted findings that distinguish between the 2 
conditions. Musculoskeletal US of muscles in CRPS was characterized by a variable or/and global intramuscular structural disruption with loss of muscle bulk. Adjacent muscles coalesced with one another to present an uniform hyper -echogenic mass of tissue. Muscle edema was found in 
some patients. In comparison, MSK- US in muscles affected by 
neuropathic pain exhibited structural normalcy, but also showed considerable reduction in muscle bulk. The authors concluded that MSK ­
US showed promise as a diagnostic modality to distinguish between 
these 2 conditions that currently have only clinical diagnostic criteria to 
aid diagnosis. 
Other Experimental and Investigational Procedures 
An UpToDate review on "Complex regional pain syndr ome in adults: 
Pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis" (Abdi, 2015) states 
that "Plain radiographs often demonstrate patchy osteoporosis but the 
sensitivity of this finding for CRPS is very low …. Autonomic tests that have been used to evaluate patients with suspected CRPS include the 
resting sweat output (RSO), the resting skin temperature (RST), and the 
quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test (QSART). Some experts advocate serial measurement of skin temperatures, based upon evidence 
from one small study that a 2°C difference for the affected versus 
unaffected side was supportive of the diagnosis of CRPS. However, this method requires monitoring for five to eight hours with recording of skin 
temperature at one minute intervals using temperature sensors applied to 
the index fingers. Thus, it is not practical as a routine clinical test …. 
There is no clear role for MRI or CT scanning in the evaluation of 
suspected CRPS, nor is there any role for the response to sympatholysis 
to confirm the diagnosis of CRPS". 
Anti -Neuronal antibodies/Autoantibodies      
 
         
      
     
      
     
      
         
       
         
        
         
        
     
   
             
    
   
   
 
 
 
       
        
               
       
      
           
         
      
    
          
            
         
       
           
         
           
         Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 11 of 30 
Dirckx et al (2015) noted that autoimmunity has been suggested as one 
of the pathophysiologic mechanisms that may underlie CRPS. Screening 
for anti -nuclear antibodies (ANA) is one of the diagnostic tests, which is 
usually performed if a person is suspected to have a systemic autoimmune disease. Anti -neuronal antibodies are autoantibodies 
directed against antigens in the central and/or peripheral nervous system. These researchers compared the prevalence of these antibodies 
in CRPS patients with the normal values of those antibodies in the healthy population; 27 (33 %) of the 82 CRPS patients of whom serum was available showed a positive ANA test. This prevalence was 
significantly higher than in the general population; 6 patients (7.3 %) 
showed a positive result for typical anti -neuronal antibodies. This 
proportion, however, did not deviate from that in the general population. The authors concluded that these findings suggested that autoantibodies may be associated with the pathophysiology of CRPS, at least in a subs et 
of patients. Moreover, they stated that further research is needed into defining this subset and into the role of autoantibodies in the pathogenesis of CRPS. 
Response to Systemic Chemical Sympatholysis 
An UpToDate review on "Complex regional pain syndrome in adults: 
Pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis" (Abdi, 2016) states 
that "Other tests and interventions --There is no clear role for MRI or CT 
scanning in the evaluation of suspected CRPS, nor is there any role for 
the response to sympatholysis to confirm the diagnosis of CRPS. MRI may be useful for excluding some conditions in the differential diagnosis; 
but is not useful for confirming the diagnosis of CRPS. Limited data 
suggest that CT scanning can show focal areas of osteoporosis in a Swiss cheese-like appearance. However, weighing the cost, radiation dose, and limited experience with use of CT scanning in evaluation of patients with CRPS, we suggest not using CT as a diagnostic test. 
Historically, abrupt transient relief from pain and dysesthesia with a systemic chemical sympatholysis (i.e., intravenous regional anesthesia, 
also termed a Bier block, and/or a regional sympathetic nerve block such 
as stellate ganglion or lumbar sympathetic nerve blocks) was considered 
necessary to make the diagnosis of CRPS. However, as the role of the sympathetic nervous system in the pathogenesis of CRPS remains      
 
     
          
      
 
  
 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 12 of 30 
unclear and contradictory, it is now widely accepted that a positive 
response to sympathetic block is not diagnostic of CRPS. Rather, such a 
response is an important indicator of sympathetically maintained pain". 
Bone Scintigraphy 
Wertli  and  colleagues  (2017)  noted  that  since  2007,  the  Budapest  criteria  
are  recommended for  the  diagnosis  of  CRPS 1.  The usefulness  of  bone 
scintigraphy (BS, index test) for the d  iagnosis  of  CRPS 1 r  emains  
controversial.  Imperfect  reference  tests  (RT)  result  in  under -estimation  of  
the diagnostic  accuracy  of  BS.  Further,  biased  results  can  occur  when a 
dependency  between  the  RT  and BS  exists.  These researchers  
evaluated the impact  of  different  RTs,  specifically the B  udapest criteria,  
and the as  sumed imperfect nature o  f the RT  on the d iagnostic  accuracy  
of  BS.  Further,  these  investigators  analyzed  the  association  between 
baseline characteristics  and  positive  BS in  patients  with  CRPS 1.  The 
authors  performed a systematic  literature  review  and Bayesian  meta-  
analysis  to  assess  the  test  accuracy  of  BS  with  and  without  accounting  for 
the imperfect  nature of   the  RT.  They  examined  correlations  (Spearman 
correlation  coefficients  /  Wilcoxon  tests)  between  baseline  characteristics  
and the  proportion  of  positive  BS in  patients  with  CRPS 1.  The pooled 
sensitivity  was  0.804  (95  %  CI:  0.225  to  1.0,  21  studies)  and  specificity  
0.853  (95  %CI:  0.278  to  1.00).  Sensitivity  and  specificity  of  BS  increased  
when  accounting  for  the  imperfect  nature  of t he  RT.  However,  in  studies  
using  Budapest  criteria  as  reference,  the  sensitivity  decreased  (0.551;  95  
%  CI:  0.046  to  1)  and  the  specificity  increased  (0.935;  95  %  CI:  0.306  to 
1).  Shorter  disease  duration  and a  higher  proportion  of  males  were  
associated  with  a higher  proportion  of  positive  BS (27 studies,  disease  
duration  less  than  52  weeks;  Wilcoxon  test  p  =  0.047,  female  proportion  
Spearman correlation  -0.63,  p  =  0.009).  The authors  concluded  that  
compared to  the accepted  Budapest  diagnostic  criteria,  BS cannot  be  
used to rule-in the d  iagnosi s  of  CRPS 1.  In  patients  with  negative BS,  
CRPS 1 is less likely the underlying illness.  They  stated that  studies  
using  older  or  no  diagnostic  criteria  should not  be used  to  evaluate the  
diagnostic  accuracy  of BS in C  RPS 1.  These investigators stated that  
based  on  the  results  of  this  study,  BS  did  not  add  any  value  to  the  clinical 
diagnosis  of  CRPS  1,  and  cannot  be  used  to  confirm  the  diagnosis.       
 
           
         
      
        
       
    
           
          
  
       
 
 
 
       
    
       
          
     
       
        
    
      
        
     
        
      
       
   
       
       
      
       
         
      
   
      
          
         
       Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 13 of 30 
The study was limited by the small number of studies using a reference 
test for the diagnosis of CRPS 1. Furthermore, many studies were only of 
moderate or low quality and some of small sample size. Small studies on diagnostic accuracy were often imprecise, with wide CIs. The lack of a gold standard reference test is another drawback, whi ch the authors 
addressed within the Bayesian model formulation; however, the resulting 
posterior CIs for overall sensitivity and specificity of the index test were 
wider than they would be with a perfect reference test. Only few studies reported factors that influence sensitivity and therefore, the findings need to be interpreted with caution and addressed in future studies 
Gene Expression Proﬁling 
Tan and colleagues (2017) predicted key genes and proteins associated 
with CRPS using bioinformatics analysis. The gene expression profiling 
microarray data, GSE47603, which included peripheral blood samples from 4 patients with CRPS and 5 healthy controls, was obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The differentially expressed 
genes (DEGs) in CRPS patients compared with healthy controls were 
identified using the GEO2R online tool. Functional enrichment analysis was then performed using the Database for Annotation Visualization and Integrated Discovery online tool. Protein -protein interaction ( PPI) network 
analysis was subsequently performed using Search Tool for the Retrieval 
of Interaction Genes database and analyzed with Cytoscape software. A 
total of 257 DEGs were identified, including 243 up- regulated genes and 
14 down- regulated ones. Genes in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 
family were most significantly differentially expressed. Enrichment analysis demonstrated that signaling pathways, including immune 
response, cell motion, adhesion and angiogenesis were associated with 
CRPS. Protein- protein interaction network analysis revealed that key 
genes, including early region 1A binding protein p300 (EP300), 
CREB
‑binding protein (CREBBP), signal transducer and activator of 
transcription (STAT)3, STAT5A and integrin α M were associated with 
CRPS. The authors concluded that the results suggested that the immune response may therefore serve an important role in CRPS 
development. Also, genes in the HLA family, such as HLA
‑DQB1 and 
HLA‑DRB1, may present potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of C RPS. 
Furthermore, EP300, its paralog CREBBP, and the STAT family genes, STAT3 and STAT5 may be important in the development of CRPS.      
 
 
           
           
     
    
  
            
         
         
         
        
                 
                      
       
                 
   
       
            
                  
                
       
   
       
        
         
   
 
 
     
 
           
             
  
          
            
        
           
    Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 14 of 30 
Positron Emission Tomography 
Jeon and colleagues (2017) noted that CRPS is characterized by chronic, 
severe pain, but its pathophysiology is not clearly understood. In a pilot 
study, these researchers examined neuro -inflammation in patients with 
CRPS using positron emission tomography (PET), with an 18 -kDa 
translocator protein specific radio -ligand [C] -(R)-PK111 95. [C] -(R)­
PK11195 PET scans were acquired for 11 patients with CRPS (aged 30 to 
55 years) and 12 control subjects (aged 30 to 52 years). Parametric 
image of distribution volume ratio (DVR) for each participant was 
generated by applying a relative equilibrium -based graphical analysis . 
The DVR of [C] -(R)-PK11195 in the caudate nucleus (t(21)= -3.209, 
p=0.004), putamen (t(21)= -2.492, p=0.022), nucleus accumbens 
(t(21)= -2.218, p=0.040), and thalamus (t(21)= -2.395, p=0.026) were 
significantly higher in CRPS patients than in healthy controls. Those 
of globus pallidus (t(21)= -2.045, p=0.054) tended to be higher in 
CRPS patients than in healthy controls. In patients with CRPS, there 
was a positive correlation between the DVR of [C]-(R)-PK11195 in 
the caudate nucleus and the pain score, the visual analog scale (VAS; 
r=0.661, p=0.026,R=0.408) and affective subscales of McGill Pain 
Questionnaire (r=0.604, p=0.049, R=0.364). These investigators 
demonstrated neuro -inflamm ation in basal ganglia of CRPS patients. 
The authors concluded that these findings suggested that microglial 
pathology can be an important pathophysiology of CRPS; association 
between the level of caudate nucleus and pain severity indicated that 
neuro -inflammation in this region might play a key role in the central 
sensitization in CRPS highlighting a fascinating area for future 
research. 
This study had 2 main drawbacks: (i) this study only examined a small 
number of CRPS type I patients (n = 11). Thus, future studies with 
larger  sample  size are needed  to generalize  this ﬁnding  to CRPS  
patients as a whole, and (ii) CRPS patients included in this study were 
taking analgesic agents, including opioids, during the study period, 
and these researchers were therefore unable to exclude this analgesic 
eﬀect  in the results. However, they did examine subjects who were not 
taking benzodiazepine drugs, which directly affects 18-kDa translocator 
protein (TSPO) -binding affinities, for at least 2 weeks before the [11C] ­
(R)-PK11195 PET examination to minimize medicationeffect.      
  
 
       
        
      
    
   
        
   
       
    
       
    
 
       
       
         
     
      
         
           
          
     
          
            
 
 
   
 
 
     
          
     
              
       
          
         
          
              Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 15 of 30 
Bone SPECT/CT 
Narimatsu and colleagues (2017) reported on the case of a 64- year old 
man with lung cancer with a history of re- vascularization of the occluded 
right femoral artery who underwent bone scintigraphy, which showed 
intense uptake in the distal side of the right leg. The additional SPECT/CT clarified that the uptake was predominantly increased in the epiphyses of the right ankle and foot with possible osteopenia. One 
month later, follow -up SPECT/CT showed the manifestation of periosteal 
resorption in the hyper -metabolic sites with slight decrease in bone 
metabolism. The authors concluded that radiological correlation between 
bone metabolism and subsequent bone resorption in addition to clinical symptoms in this patient suggested the diagnosis of RSD. 
An UpToDate review on "Complex regional pain syndrome in adults: 
Pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis" (Abdi, 2018) states 
"There is no clear role for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) scanning in the evaluation of suspected 
CRPS, nor is there any role for the response to sympatholysis to confirm 
the diagnosis of CRPS. MRI may be useful for excluding some conditions in the differential diagnosis but is not useful for confirming the diagnosis of CRPS. Limited data suggest that CT scanning can show focal areas of osteoporosis in a Swiss cheese- like appearance. However, weighing the 
cost, radiation dose, and limited experience with use of CT scanning in evaluation of patients with CRPS, we suggest not using CT as a diagnostic test". 
Measurements of Dermal Nerve Fiber and Mast Cell Density, and 
Proximity of Mast Cells to Nerve Fibers 
Morellini and colleagues (2018) noted that an interaction between cutaneous nerves and mast cells may contribute to pain in CRPS. To 
explore this, these investigators examined the density of dermal nerve fibers, and the density and proximity of mast cells to nerve fibers, in skin 
biopsies obtained from the affected and unaffected limbs of 57 patients with CRPS and 28 site-matched healthy controls. The percentage of the 
dermis stained by the pan- neuronal marker protein gene -product 9.5 was 
lower in the affected limb of patients than in controls (0.12 ± 0.01 % versus 0.22 ± 0.04 %, p < 0.05), indicating a reduction in dermal nerve      
 
         
             
          
           
        
            
           
           
           
          
          
          
        
            
              
  
 
  
 
 
             
         
     
    
          
     
         
       
     
      
    
         
        
 
         
       
        
      
          Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 16 of 30 
fiber density. This parameter did not correlate with CRPS duration. 
However, it was lower in the affected than unaffected limb of patients with 
warm CRPS. Dermal mast cell numbers were similar in patients and controls, but the percentage of mast cells less than 5 µm from nerve fibers was significantly lower in the affected and unaffected limbs of patients than in controls (16.8 ± 1.7 %, 16.5 ± 1.7 %, and 31.4 ± 2.3 % 
respectively, p < 0.05). The authors confirmed previous findings of a mild 
neuropathy in CRPS. They stated that these findings suggested that this 
either developed very early after injury or preceded CRPS onset; and loss 
of dermal nerve fibers in CRPS might result in loss of chemotactic 
signals, thus halting mast cell migration toward surviving nerve fibers. 
Failure of normal nerve fiber -mast cell interactions could contribute to the 
pathophysiology of CRPS. Further investigation is needed to establish the clinical value, if any, of measurement of dermal nerve fiber and mast 
cell density, and proximity of mast cells to nerve fibers as a diagnostic tool 
for CRPS. 
Small Non -Coding RNAs (microRNAs) as Diagnostic and Prognostic 
Biomarkers for CRPS 
Konig and co-workers (2017) stated that CRPS is a rare, but often painful 
and disabling, disease. Biomarkers are lacking, but several inflammatory 
substances have been associated with the pathophysiology. These 
researchers outlined the current knowledge with respect to target 
biomolecules and the analytical tools available to measure them. Targets 
include cytokines, neuropeptides and resolvins; analysis strategies are thus needed for different classes of substances such as proteins, peptides, lipids and small molecules. Traditional methods like 
immunoassays are of importance next to state -of-the art high- resolution 
mass spectrometry techniques and "omics" approaches. The authors 
concluded that future biomarker studies need larger cohorts, which improve sub-grouping of patients due totheir presumed pathophysiology, 
and highly standardized work -flows from sampling to analysis. 
Birklein and colleagues (2018) CRPS is a pain condition that usually 
affects a single limb, often following an injury. The underlying pathophysiology appeared to be complex and probably varies between 
patients. Clinical diagnosis is based on internationally agreed- upon 
criteria, which consider the reported symptoms, presence of signs and      
 
      
      
       
       
      
          
         
      
        
    
         
        
         
            
           
      
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
       
   
     
        
     
       
        
     
           
          
       
           
          
          
         Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 17 of 30 
exclusion of alternative causes. Research into CRPS biomarkers to 
support patient stratification and improve diagnostic certainty is an important scientific focus, a nd recent progress in this area provides an 
opportunity for an up-to -date topical review of measurable disease- 
predictive, diagnostic and prognostic parameters. Clinical and biochemical attributes of CRPS that may aid diagnosis and determination 
of appropriate treatment are delineated. Findings that predict the development of CRPS and support the diagnosis include trauma- related 
factors, neurocognitive peculiarities, psychological markers, and local and 
systemic changes that indicate activation of the immune system. The authors concluded that analysis of signatures of non- coding microRNAs 
that could predict the treatment response represents a new line of research; and results from the past 5 years of CRPS research indicated that a single marker for CRPS would probably never be found; however, a 
range of biomarkers might assist in clinical diagnosis and guide prognosis 
and treatment. These researchers noted that small non -coding RNAs 
(microRNAs) are emerging as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for CRP S. 
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) and Positron Emission 
Tomography (PET) of Brain Metabolites and Peripheral Biomarkers of Inﬂammation in Diagnosis and Management ofCRPS 
In a pilot study, Jung and colleagues (2019a) examined peripheral 
biomarkers and central metabolites affecting neuroinflammation in CRPS 
patients using [11C] -(R)-PK11195 PET and magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy (MRS). These researchers measured associations 
between neuro- metabolites and neuroinflammation in 12 CRPS patients 
and 11 healthy controls. Furthermore, these investigators examined 
various peripheral parameters that may affect neuroinflammation in CRPS. They found positive correlations of Lipid (Lip)13a/total creatine (tCr) and Lip09/tCr with neuroinflammation, the distribution volume ratio 
(DVR) of [11C] -(R)-PK11195 in the right and left insula in CRPS patients. 
However, these correlations were not found in controls. High hemoglobin 
levels correlated with decreased neuroinflammation (the DVR of [11C] ­
(R)-PK11195) in the right thalamus and left insula in healthy controls. 
These researchers found that high levels of glucose and pH correlated 
with increased neuroinflammation, but high levels of CO2, basophil, and 
creatinine were associated with decreased neuroinflammation in the left      
 
         
   
         
       
   
     
       
   
 
         
       
        
    
    
     
        
            
            
            
             
    
          
       
        
         
        
          
           
   
 
 
 
 
         
          
     
             
         
           Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 18 of 30 
thalamus and the right and left insula in CRPS patients. The authors 
concluded that this was the first report indicating that elevated neuroinflammation levels were associated primarily with lipids in the brain 
and pH, glucose, CO2, basophil, and creatinine in the peripheral parameters in CRPS patients. These researchers stated that these findings suggested that characterizing the peripheral biomarkers and 
central metabolites affecting neuroinflammation is essential to understanding the pathophysiology of CRPS. 
In a pilot study, Jung and associates (2019b) examined distinct neuro­metabolites in the right and left thalamus and insula of patients with CRPS compared with healthy controls using proton MRS. Levels of N ­
acetyl -aspartate (NAA), N-acetyl -aspartyl -glutamate (NAAG), myo-inositol 
(ml), glutamine (Gln), glycerol- phospho- choline (GPC), glutathione 
(GSH ), and alanine (Ala) relative to tCr levels, including creatine and 
phosphocreatine, were determined in the right and left thalamus and insula in 12 patients with CRPS compared with 11 healthy controls using 
MRS. Levels of NAAG/tCr and Ala/tCr were higher in patients with CRPS 
than in controls in the left thalamus; NAAG/tCr, ml/tCr, and Gln/tCr levels 
were higher but NAA/tCr levels were lower in the right insula of patients with CRPS compared with controls. There were negative correlations between GSH/tCr and pain score (McGill Pain Questionnaire) in the left thalamus. These findings were paramount to understand and determine all aspects of the complex pathophysiological mechanisms that underlie 
CRPS, including involvement of the central and para- sympathetic nervous 
systems as well as oxidative stress and antioxidants. The authors 
concluded that the distinct metabolites presented herein may be essential 
to understand a strong diagnostic and prognostic potential for CRPS and 
to develop effectiv e medical treatments. 
Biomarkers of Inﬂammation in the Diagnosis and Management of 
CRPS 
Bharwani and colleagues (2019) stated that CRPS is characterized by 
continuous pain that is often accompanied by sensory, motor, vasomotor, 
sudomotor, and trophic disturbances. If left untreated, it could have a 
significant impact on the quality of life (QOL) of patients. The diagnosis of 
CRPS is currently based on a set of relatively subjective clinical criteria: the New International Association for the Study of Pain clinical diagnostic      
 
         
       
       
    
    
       
     
  
  
       
       
        
    
      
    
         
 
  
 
   
        
         
     
          
       
        
   
         
    
   
      
          
    
        
   
   
     
       
         Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 19 of 30 
criteria for CRPS. There are still no objective laboratory tests to diagnose 
CRPS and there is a great need for simple, objective, and easily measurable biomarkers in the diagnosis and management of this disease. These investigators discussed the role of inflammation in the 
multi -mechanism pathophysiology of CRPS and highlighted the 
application of potential biomarkers of inflammation (e.g., autoantibodies, 
calcitonin gene- related peptide [CGRP], CD8+ T lymphocytes, 
CD14+CD16+ monocytes, interleukin- 6 [IL-6], mast cell numbers, 
microRNA [miRNA], soluble interleukin- 2 receptor [sIL- 2R], substance P 
[SP], and tumor necrosis factor -alpha [TNF -α]) in the diagnosis and 
management of this disease. The authors concluded that although there are a number of promising biomarkers of inflammation described in 
CRPS, it is still difficult to determine the place of these biomarkers in the diagnosis and management of CRPS based on the current literature. 
These researchers stated that future studies should focus on finding correlations between clinical symptoms and signs and these biomarkers. 
DNA Methylation Proﬁles and CRPS After Traumatic Injury 
Bruehl and colleagues (2019) noted that factors contributing to 
development of CRPS are not fully understood. These researchers examined possible epigenetic mechanisms that may contribute to CRPS 
following traumatic injury. DNA methylation profiles were compared 
between individuals developing CRPS (n = 9) and those developing non- 
CRPS neuropathic pain (n = 38) after undergoing amputation following military trauma. Linear Models for Microarray (LIMMA) analyses revealed 
48 differentially methylated cytosine- phosphate- guanine dinucleotide 
(CpG) sites between groups (unadjusted p's < 0.005), with the top gene 
COL11A1 meeting Bonferroni -adjusted p < 0.05. The 2nd largest 
differential methylation was observed for the HLA-DRB6 gene, an 
immune- related gene linked previously to CRPS in a small gene 
expression study. For all but 7 of the significant CpG sites, the CRPS 
group was hypo- methylated. Numerous functional Gene Ontology -
Biological Process categories were significantly enriched (false discovery 
rate-adjusted q value < 0.15), including multiple immune -related 
categories (e.g., activation of immune response, immune system development, regulation of immune system processes, and antigen processing and presentation). Differentially methylated genes were more 
highly connected in human protein -protein networks than expected by      
 
         
           
            
     
  
           
         
   
     
 
 
 
        
            
    
           
       
      
         
           
       
         
         
      
   
   
     
       
     
         
     
     
          
           
          
                  
         
 
           Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 20 of 30 
chance (p < 0.05), supporting the biological relevance of the findings. 
Results were validated in an independent sample linking a DNA biobank 
with electronic health records (n = 126 for CRPS phenotype, n = 19,768 
for non- CRPS chronic pain phenotype). Analyses using PrediXcan 
methodology indicated differences in the genetically determined component of gene expression in 7 of 48 genes identified in methylation 
analyses (p's < 0.02). The authors concluded that these findings suggested that immune- and inflammatory -related factors might confer 
risk of developing CRPS following traumatic injury. 
Electronic Nose (Aeonose) for Diagnosis of CRPS 
Bijl and co lleagues (2019) noted that CRPS is a complication after 
surgery or trauma and is characterized by a continuing regional pain in a 
distal extremity. The pain is disproportionate in severity and duration in relation to the preceding trauma. Currently, the diagnosis is based on the 
patients' signs and symptoms. There is no objective clinically applicable test available to confirm the diagnosis of CRPS, however this could contribute to a more reliable and valid diagnosis. Since the treatment of CRPS differs from that of other types of pain this could thereby lead to earlier and (more) appropriate treatment and possibly to lower medical 
costs. The Aeonose is a diagnostic test device that detects volatile 
organic profiles in exhaled air. Exhaled breath analysis using an electronic nose has been successfully applied to differentiate between sick and healthy individuals for various indications. In a prospective, observational, feasibility/pilot study, these investigators examined if the 
Aeonose is ab le to measure a difference in the volatome of CRPS 
patients compared to the volatome of healthy controls. Subjects were 
adult patients diagnosed with CRPS according to the latest IASP criteria (n = 36) and matched healthy controls (n = 36). Breath profiles were 
sampled by breathing in and out through the Aeonose. Data were 
compressed using a Tucker3-like solution and subsequently used for 
training an artificial neural network together with the classification "CRPS: 
Yes" or "CRPS: No". Cross -validation was applied using the leave- 10 %­
out method. Data of the 72 subjects were analyzed, resulting in a sensitivity of 83 % (95 % CI: 67 % to 93 %), specificity of 78 % (95 % CI: 
60 % to 89 %), and an overall accuracy of 81 %. The authors concluded that the findings of this study suggested that the Aeonose could distinguish patients with CRPS from healthy controls based on analysis of      
 
        
             
    
 
     
         
       
      
           
        
          
 
 
 
   
 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 21 of 30 
their volatome. Moreover, these researchers stated that further validation 
steps are needed to establish the value of the Aeonose in the differential 
diagnostic process of CRPS. 
The authors stated that drawbacks of this study were that these 
researchers did not correct for lifestyle, physiological status and genetic background, that the percentage of cardiac, pulmonary and gastro­intestinal co -morbidities were significantly different between the patients 
and healthy controls and that although patients were asked to refrain from 
drinking alcohol, coffee and smoking 1 hour before the breath sample 
was taken, there was no period of refrainment on eating and drinking in 
general. 
High -Resolution Peripheral Quantitative Computed Tomography for 
Evaluation of CRPS -Associated Osteopenia 
Oehler  and  colleagues  (2019)  noted  that  in  the  course of  CRPS,  local  
osteopenia in the s  ubchondral/subcortical  areas  of the affected limb  
represents  a  central  manifestation.  Mechanistic  aspects  of  CRPS - 
associated  pathologies remain unc  lear,  and knowledge regarding bone  
morphology in C  RPS -affected areas is rare.  These researchers  
examined trabecular  and cortical  bone microstructure  in  patients  with  
CRPS of  the distal  tibiae.  They  retrospectively  analyzed  14 women 
diagnosed with  unilateral  CRPS type  I  of  the  lower  limb  whose affected 
and unaffected  distal  tibiae  were  examined by  high- resolution  peripheral  
quantitative  computed  tomography  (HR-pQCT).  Laboratory tests  
included  serum  levels  of  calcium,  phosphate,  25-hydroxyvitamin  D,  bone 
alkaline  phosphatase,  parathyroid hormone,  osteocalcin  and urinary  
levels  of  deoxypyridinoline  (DPD).  Bone mineral  density  (BMD)  was 
measured  by  dual-energy  X-ray  absorptiometry  (DXA)  at  the  lumbar  spine 
and both proximal  femurs.  Average urinary  DPD levels, a b  iochemical  
marker  of  bone resorption,  were  elevated in  the  examined patient  cohort  
(7.1  ±  1.9  nmol/mmol,  reference  3.0  to  7.0  nmol/mmol).  According  to  HR­ 
pQCT,  CRPS -affected distal  tibiae  showed significantly  lower  values  of  
cortical BMD and c ortical thickness  compared to the unaffected 
contralateral  side.  Furthermore,  bone  volume  relative  to  total  volume  was 
significantly  lower.  Trabecular  number  and  trabecular  thickness  tended  to 
be lower  in  the affected tibiae.  The authors  concluded  that  CRPS is  
associated  with  significant  alterations  in  bone  microstructure  of  the       
 
          
         
 
 
 
        
      
           
        
         
        
          
          
        
          
          
    
      
         
    
     
   
       
         
           
     
          
        
        
         
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 22 of 30 
affected tibiae; and increased bone resorption appeared to play a crucial 
role within a multi -factorial process of CRPS -mediated bone atrophy. 
Screening and Diagnostic Tools for CRPS 
Mesaroli and colleagues (2021) stated that CRPS is a severely painful 
condition that presents with a constellation of symptoms. The 
understanding of the pathophysiology of CRPS has evolved over time, as 
have the diagnostic criteria. These investigators identified screening and 
diagnostic tools for CRPS and summarized their feasibility, measurement 
properties, and study quality. A secondary objective was to identify 
screening and diagnostic tools used for CRPS in pediatric populations (0 
to 21 years of age). They carried out a systematic review of English articles in electronic databases (PsycINFO, Medline, Embase, CINAHL, CENTRAL, and Web of Science) with the aid of a librarian in November 2018 and updated in July 2020. Studies were included if the tool was a 
screening or diagnostic tool, the tool included self -report or physical 
examination, and the primary objective of the study was to assess the 
measurement properties or feasibility of use. For each study, data were 
extracted for quality indicators using the QUADAS -2 tool. No screening 
tools were identified. A total of 4 diagnostic tools were identified: the 
Veldman criteria, International Association for the Study of Pain criteria, 
Budapest Criteria, and Budapest Research Criteria. There are no diagnostic tools validated for use in pediatric CRPS. The authors concluded that because there are no extant screening tools for CRPS, all 
individuals with suspected disease should undergo rapid diagnostic 
assessment by a clinician. For adults, the Budapest Criteria are the 
preferred diagnostic tool. Moreover, these investigators stated that future 
research is recommended to develop a diagnostic tool for pediatric populations and screening tools for both pediatric and adults. 
CPT Codes/  HCPCS Codes/ICD- 10 Codes  
Information in the [brackets] below has been added for clarification 
purposes. Codes requiring a 7th character are represented by “+” 
Code  Code Description  
CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB: 
CREB -binding protein (CREBBP), Measurement of serum anti -neuronal 
antibodies/ autoantibodies, Gene expression profiling of early region 1A 
binding protein p300 (EP300), Signal transducer and activator of 
transcription (STAT)3, Signal transducer and activator of transcription of 
(STAT5A), Measurement of dermal nerve fiber and mast cell density,      
 
  
  
 
  
  
    
     
     
    
    
   
     
   
  
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
    
 
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 23 of 30 
Proximity of mast cells to nerve fibers, Small non -coding RNAs (microRNAs) 
 
as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers, inflammation biomarkers, DNA 
 
methy lation profiles, electronic nose (Aeonose), high -resolution peripheral 
 
quantitative computed tomography : No specific code 
 
• 72170, 
• 72190 Radiologic examination, pelvis 
73000 -73140 Radiologic examination, upper extremities 
73501 -73660 Radiologic examination, lower extremities 
73218 -73222 Magnetic resonance imaging, upper extremities 
73718 -73723 Magnetic resonance imaging, lower extremities 
76390 Magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
76881 -76882 Ultrasound, extremity, nonvascular, real -time with image 
documentation; complete or limited, anatomic specific 
 
77078 Computed tomography, bone mineral density study, 1 or 
 
more sites, axial skeleton (e.g., hips, pelvis, spine) 
 
78811 Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging, limited area 
 
(e.g., chest, head/neck) 
 
78812 skull base to mid -thigh 
78813 whole body 
81111 Human Platelet Antigen 9 genotyping (HPA -hyphen9w0, 
ITGA2B (integrin, alpha 2b (platelet glycoprotein llb of 
llb/llla complex, antigen CD41) [GPllb]) (e.g. neonatal 
alloimmune thrombocytopenia [NAIT], post -transfusion 
 
purpural), gene analysis, common variant, HPA -9a/b 
 
(V837M) 
 
81370 -81377 HLA Class I and II typing, low resolution (e.g., antigen 
 
equivalents) 
 
81378 -81383 HLA Class I typing, high resolution (i.e., alleles or allele 
 
groups) 
 
82725 Fatty acids, nonesterified 
82726 Very long chain fatty acids 
82978 Glutathione 
93740 Temperature gradient studies 
93922 Limited bilateral non -invasive physiologic studies of upper
or lower extremity arteries, (e.g., for lower extremity:
ankle/brachial indices at distal posterior tibial and anterior 
tibial/dorsalis pedis arteries plus bidirectional, Doppler 
waveform recording and analysis at 1 -hyphen2 levels, or 
ankle/brachial indices at distal posterior tibial and anterior 
tibial/dorsalis pedis arteries plus volume plethysmography 
at 1-2 lev els, or ankle/brachial indices at distal posterior 
tibial and anterior tibial/dorsalis pedis arteries with 
transcutaneous oxygen tension measurements at 1 -2 
levels) 
93923 Complete bilateral non -invasive physiologic studies of 
 
upper or lower extremity arteries, 3 or more levels (e.g., 
 
for lower extremity: ankle/brachial indices at distal 
posterior tibial and anterior tibial/dorsalis pedis arteries 
 
plus segmental blood pressure measurements with 
      
 
    
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
   
 
  
 
    
    
 
   
 
 
    
          
      
  
          
      
  
          
     
  
        
        
        
     
        
           
 
           
        
   Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 24 of 30 
bidirectional Doppler waveform recording and analysis at 
3 or more levels, or ankle/brachial indices at distal 
posterior tibial and anterior tibial/dorsalis pedis arteries 
plus segmental volume plethysmography at 3 or more 
levels, or ankle/brachial indices at distal posterior t ibial 
and anterior tibial/dorsalis pedis arteries plus segmental
transcutaneous oxygen tension measurements at 3 or
more level(s), or single level study with provocative 
functional maneuvers (e.g., measurements with postural 
provocative tests or measuremen ts with reactive 
hyperemial) 
93925 Duplex scan of lower extremity arteries or arterial bypass 
grafts; complete bilateral study 
93926 unilateral or limited study 
93931 Duplex scan of upper extremity arteries or arterial bypass 
grafts; unilateral or limited study 
HCPCS codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB: 
J2760 Injection, phentolamine mesylate, [Regitine], up to 5 mg 
ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB (not all -inclusive): 
G90.50 -G90.9 Complex regional pain syndrome I (CRPS I) 
M85.80 – M85.9 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure 
[osteopenia] 
S00.00xA -T34.99xS Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of 
external causes 
The above policy is based on the following references: 
1. Abdi S. Complex regional pain syndrome in adults: Pathogenesis, 
clinical manifestations, and diagnosis. UpToDate [online serial]. 
Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed November 2015. 
2. Abdi S. Complex regional pain syndrome in adults: Pathogenesis, 
clinical manifestations, and diagnosis. UpToDate [online serial]. 
Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed September 2016. 
3. Abdi S. Complex regional pain syndrome in adults: Pathogenesis, 
clinical manifestations, and diagnosis. UpToDate [online serial] . 
Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed September 2018. 
4. Albazaz R, Wong YT, Homer -Vanniasinkam S. Complex regional 
pain syndrome: A review. Ann Vasc Surg. 2008;22(2):297 -306. 
5. Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research (AHFMR). 
Reﬂex  sympathetic dystrophy. Information Paper. Tech -Wise 
Publications Issue 11. Edmonton, AB: AHFMR; May 1998. 
6. Atkins RM. Complex regional pain syndrome. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 
2003;85(8):1100 -1106. 
7. Baron R, Maier C. Reﬂex  sympathetic dystrophy: Skin blood ﬂow, 
sympathetic  vasoconstrictor  reﬂexes  and pain  before  and after  
surgical sympathectomy. Pain. 1996;67(2 -3):317 -326.      
           
         
  
          
 
  
  
          
          
  
    
       
  
             
        
  
    
        
 
            
        
   
 
       
       
  
  
         
  
 
        
 
         
  
 
  
   
       
        
   Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 25 of 30 
8. Baykal T,  Seferoglu  B, Karsan  O, et al. Antioxidant  proﬁle  in
 
patients with complex regional pain syndrome type I. Int J Rheum 
Dis. 2014;17(2):156 -158. 
 
9. Bharwani KD, Dik WA, Dirckx M, Huygen FJPM. Highlighting the 
role of biomarkers of inﬂammation in the diagnosis and  
management of complex regional pain syndrome. Mol Diagn 
 
Ther. 2019;23(5):615 -626. 
 
10. Bijl EJ, Groeneweg JG, Wess elius DW, et al. Diagnosing complex 
regional pain syndrome using an electronic nose, a pilot study. J 
Breath Res. 2019 Apr 16;13(3):036004. 
 
11. Birklein F, Ajit SK, Goebel A, et al. Complex regional pain 
 
syndrome -phenotypic characteristics andpotential biomarkers. 
 
Nat Rev Neurol. 2018;14(5):272 -284. 
 
12. Bruehl S, Gamazon ER, Van de Ven T, et al. DNA methylation 
 
proﬁles  are associated with complex regional pain syndrome 
 
after traumatic injury. Pain. 2019;160(10):2328 -2337. 
 
13. Cohen SP, Raja SN. Does prolonged skin temperature 
 
measurement improve the diagnosis of complex regional pain 
 
syndrome? Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2009;5(1):14 -15. 
14. Dirckx M, Schreurs MW, de Mos M, et al. The prevalence of 
autoantibodies in complex regional pain syndrome type I.
 
Mediators  Inﬂamm.  2015;2015:718201. 
 
15. Fine PG, Roberts WJ, Gillette RG, Child TR. Slowly developing 
placebo responses confound tests of intravenous phentolamine 
 
to determine mechanisms underlying idiopathic chronic low back 
pain. Pain. 1994;56(2):235 -242. 
 
16. Forst T, Caduﬀ A, Talary M, et al. Impact of environmental 
 
temperature on skin thickness and microvascular blood ﬂow in
 
subjects with and without diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther. 
 
2006;8(1):94 -101. 
 
17. Galer BS. Reﬂex  sympathetic dystrophy syndrome. Lancet. 
 
1994;344(8923):691. 
 
18. Gorodkin R, Moore T, Herrick A. Assessment of endothelial 
function in complex regional pain syndrome type I using 
 
iontophoresis and laser Doppler imaging. Rheumatology 
 
(Oxford). 2004;43(6):727 -730. 
 
19. Gradl G, Beyer A, Azad S, Schurmann M. Evaluation of 
 
sympathicolysis after continuous brachial plexus analgesia using 
 
laser  Doppler  ﬂowmetry  in patients suﬀering  from  CRPS  I. 
Anasthesiol Intensivmed Notfallmed Schmerzther.      
 
          
  
            
         
     
             
    
 
       
   
   
        
  
 
          
         
 
           
       
      
         
        
  
         
  
  
        
 
 
            
         
  
           
            
   
  
          
       
        Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 26 of 30 
2005;40(6):345 -349. 
20. Harden RN. A clinical approach to complex regional pain 
syndrome. Clin J Pain. 2000;16(2 Suppl):S26 -S32. 
21. Jeon SY, Seo S, Lee JS, et al. [11C] -(R)-PK11195 positron emission 
tomography in patients with complex regional pain syndrome: A 
pilot study. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017;96(1):e5735. 
22. Jung YH, Kim H, Jeon SY, et al. Brain metabolites and peripheral 
biomarkers associated with neuroinﬂammation  in complex  
regional pain syndrome using [11C] -(R)-PK11195 positron 
emission tomography and magnetic resonancespectroscopy: A 
pilot study. Pain Med. 2019a;20(3):504 -514. 
23. Jung YH, Kim H, Jeon SY, et al. Neurometabolite changes in 
patients with complex regional pain syndrome using magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy: A pilot study. Neuroreport. 
2019b;30(2):108 -112. 
24. Konig S, Schlereth T, Birklein F. Molecular signature of complex 
regional pain syndrome (CRPS) and its analysis. Expert Rev 
Proteomics. 2017;14(10):857 -867. 
25. Krumova EK, Frettlöh J, Klauenberg S, et al. Long -term skin 
temperature measurements - a practical diagnostic tool in 
complex regional pain syndrome. Pain. 2008;140(1):8 -22. 
26. Lacey SH, Chelimsky TC. Controversies in etiology, avoidance, 
and treatment  of reﬂex  sympathetic  dystrophy.  Curr  Opin  
Orthop. 1995;6(4):45 -50. 
27. Martin CW; WCB Evidence Based Practice Group. CRPS (Complex 
Regional Pain Syndrome): Towards the development of 
diagnostic criteria and treatment guidelines. Richmond, BC: 
Workers Compensation Board of British Columbia (WorkSafe BC), 
Compensation and Rehabilitation Services Division; January 
2004. 
28. Mesaroli G, Hundert A, Birnie KA, et al. Screening and diagnostic 
tools for complex regional pain syndrome: A systematic review. 
Pain. 2021;162(5):1295 -1304. 
29. Morellini N, Finch PM, Goebel A, Drummond PD. Dermal nerve 
ﬁbre  and mast cell density, and proximity of mast cells to nerve 
ﬁbres  in the skin of patients with complex regional pain 
syndrome. Pain. 2018;159(10):2021 -2029. 
30. Narimatsu H, Nakahara T, Kodama S, et al. Bone SPECT/CT 
localizes increased bone metabolism and subsequent bone 
resorption in reﬂex  sympathetic dystrophy. Clin Nucl Med.      
 
            
      
 
 
 
         
        
   
  
         
 
  
   
            
  
            
  
     
       
     
  
          
 
        
       
  
            
   
      
  
       
  
           
        
  
              
        
  
         Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 27 of 30 
2017;42(10):784 -786. 
31. Niehof SP, Beerthuizen A, Huygen FJ, Zijlstra FJ. Using skin surface 
temperature  to diﬀerentiate  between  complex regional  pain  
syndrome type 1 patients after a fracture and control patients 
with various complain ts after a fracture. Anesth Analg. 
2008;106(1):270 -277. 
32. Niehof SP, Huygen FJ, Stronks DL, et al. Reliability of observer 
assessment of thermographic images in complex regional pain 
syndrome type 1. Acta Orthop Belg. 2007;73(1):31 -37. 
33. Oehler N, Rolvien T, Schmidt T, et al. Bone microstructure is 
signiﬁcantly  altered in CRPS -aﬀected  distal tibiae as detected by 
HR-pQCT: A retrospective cross -sectional study. J Bone Miner 
Metab. 2019;37(4):741 -748. 
34. Ramsden C, Gagnon C, Graciosa J, et al. Do omega -6 and trans 
fatty acids play a role in complex regional pain syndrome? A pilot 
study. Pain Med. 2010;11(7):1115 -1125. 
35. Rho RH, Brewer RP, Lamer TJ, Wilson PR. Complex regional pain 
syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc. 2002;77(2):174 -180. 
36. Ringer R, Wertli M, Bachmann LM, et al. Concordance of 
qualitative bone scintigraphy results with presence of clinical 
complex regional pain syndrome 1: Meta -analysis of test 
accuracy studies. Eur J Pain. 2012;16(10):1347 -1356. 
37. Schott GD. An unsympathetic view of pain. Lancet. 1995;345:634 ­
636. 
38.  Schott GD. Interrupting the sympathetic outﬂow  in causalgia and 
reﬂex  sympathetic  dystrophy:  A futile  procedure  for many 
patients. Br Med J. 1998;316(7134):792 -793. 
39. Schurmann M, Gradl G, Furst H. A standardized bedside test for 
assessment of peripheral sympathetic nervous function using 
laser Doppler ﬂowmetry. Microvasc Res. 1996;52(2):157 -170. 
40. Schürmann M, Zaspel J, Löhr P, et al. Imaging in early 
posttraumatic complex regional pain syndrome: A comparison of 
diagnostic methods. Clin J Pain. 2007;23(5):449 -457. 
41. Sorensen J, Bengtsson M. Intravenous phentolamine test --an aid 
in the evaluation of patients with persistent pain after low -back 
surgery? Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 1997;41(5):581 -585. 
42. Tan W, Song Y, Mo C, et al. Analysis of gene expression proﬁle  
microarray data in complex regional pain syndrome. Mol Med 
Rep. 2017;16(3):3371 -3378. 
43. Vacariu G. Complex regional pain syndrome. Disabil Rehabil.      
 
             
        
  
  
          
 
 
    
        
  
 
         
  
 
           
       
  
  
         
 
      
    
  
        
  Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 28 of 30 
2002;24(8):435 -442. 
44. van de Beek WJ, Schwartzman RJ, van Nes SI, et al. Diagnostic 
criteria  used  in studies  of reﬂex  sympathetic  dystrophy.  
Neurology. 2002;58(4) :522 -526. 
45. Vas L, Pai R. Musculoskeletal ultrasonography to distinguish 
muscle changes in complex regional pain syndrome type 1 from 
those of neuropathic pain: An observational study. Pain Pract. 
2016;16(1):E1 -E13. 
46. Verdugo RJ, Campero M, Ochoa JL. Phentolamine sympathetic 
block in painful polyneuropathies. II. Further questioning of the 
concept of 'sympathetically maintained pain'. Neurology. 
1994;44(6):1010 -1014. 
47. Verdugo RJ, Ochoa JL. 'Sympathetically maintained pain.' I. 
Phentolamine block questions the concept. Neurology. 
1994;44(6):1003 -1010. 
48. Wasner G, Heckmann K, Maier C, Baron R. Vascular abnormalities 
in acute  reﬂex  sympathetic  dystrophy (CRPS  I): Complete  
inhibition of sympathetic nerve activity with recovery. Arch 
Neurol. 1999;56(5):613 -620. 
49. Wasner G, Schattschneider J, Binder A, Baron R. Complex 
regional pain syndrome --diagnostic, mechanisms, CNS 
involvement and therapy. Spinal Cord. 2003;41(2):61 -75. 
50. Wertli MM, Brunner F, Steurer J, Held U. Usefulness of bone 
scintigraphy for the diagnosis of complex regional pain 
syndrome 1: A systematic review and Bayesian meta -analysis. 
PLoS One. 2017;12(3):e0173688.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
                 
       
                 
                  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 29 of 30 
Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan be nefits and 
constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or 
program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any 
results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna 
or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be 
updated and therefore is subject to change. 
Copyright © 2001 -2022 Aetna Inc.      
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): Diagnosis -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | … Page 30 of 30 
AETNA BETTER HEALTH® OF PENNSYLVANIA 
Amendment to 
 
Aetna Clinical Policy Bulletin Number: CPB 0147 Complex Regional 
 
Pain Syndrome (CRPS)/Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD): 
 
Diagnosis 
 
There are no amendments for Medicaid. 
Updated 03/09/2022 