 
UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT GUIDELINE  – 3.01.515  
Behavioral Health: Residential/Sub -Acute Detoxification  
Effective Date:  Mar. 1 , 2023  
Last Revised:  Feb. 20 , 2023  
Replaces:  N/A RELATED MEDICAL POLICIES:  
None  
 
Select a hyperlink below to be directed to that section.  
COVERAGE GUIDELINES   |  CODING   |  RELATED INFORMATION   |  REFERENCES  |  HISTORY  
∞ Clicking this icon returns you to the hyperlinks menu above.  
 
Introduction  
The general definition of detoxification is the removal of toxins. For substance use disorders, 
detoxification — commonly called detox — is the process in which the body breaks down and 
then eliminates drugs or alcohol. By allowing the body to break down t he substance without 
ingesting any more, the body is able to clear out the toxins. Sometimes, however, withdrawing 
from a substance can cause extremely uncomfortable physical symptoms. In some cases, 
withdrawal without medical help may be life threatening.  Medical detoxification helps a person 
through severe withdrawal with the use of medications, under the care and monitoring of a medical professional. Detoxification may take place in many different settings. This policy describes when detoxification in a residential or sub- acute facility may be considered medically 
necessary.  
Note:    The Introduction section is for your general knowledg e and is not to be taken as policy coverage criteria. The 
rest of the policy uses specific words and concepts familiar to medical professionals. It is intended for 
providers . A provider can be a person, such as a doctor, nurse, psychologist, or dentist. A provider also can 
be a place where medical care is given, like a hospital, clinic, or lab. This policy informs them about when a service may be covered.  
 
Coverage Guidelines   
 
Service  Medical Necessity  
Residential and sub -acute 
detoxification  Residential and sub -acute detoxification (aka, withdrawal 
management) are considered to be synonymous.  This level of 
3.01.515_PBC (02-20-2023) 
 
 
   
 
 
   
Page | 2 of 9  ∞ Service  Medical Necessity  
care may also be referred to as ASAM (American Society of 
Addiction Medicine) Level 3.7 -WM.   
 
Residential and sub -acute detoxification may be considered 
medically necessary when provided in a stand -alone substance 
use disorder or dual disorders residential treatment facility or 
sub-acute treatment facility, in a psychiatric residential 
treatment facility, in a substance use disorder or dual d isorders 
residential treatment unit in a general hospital, or in a stand -
alone detoxification facility, and the criteria listed below are met. Residential and sub -acute detoxification are considered 
to be not medically necessary when the location is a half way 
house or other sober living residence, a wilderness or 
adventure or camping program or expedition, a boarding 
school or therapeutic boarding school, a boot camp, military 
school or academy, group home, therapeutic home, or supported or alternative housing.  
 Detoxification in a stand -alone detox facility is considered to 
be sub- acute detoxification unless the facility is licensed as a 
hospital, in which the case the level of care is inpatient detoxification.  
 
Note:  This Utilization Management Guideline is in lieu of InterQual Criteria 
because InterQual Criteria do not include sub -acute detoxification, and 
do not include intervention criteria or continued stay criteria for residential detoxification. InterQual does not indicate that sub -acute and 
residenti al detoxification should always be covered.  
 
Criteria  
Symptom Criteria for Admission  
All of the following must be present:  
• Substance Use Disorder, moderate or severe, other than for tobacco/nicotine, not in remission 
AND 
• The substance or substances in use have withdrawal syndromes that can be moderate, severe, 
potentially life -threatening, can potentially cause serious physical harm, or can cause physical Page | 3 of 9  ∞ Criteria  
withdrawal symptoms that are not dangerous but are so physically intolerable that it is highly 
unlikely that withdrawal could be completed without 24/7 containment. The latter does not 
include simple or less severe physical or mental discomfort  
AND 
• Continuous use of the substance or substances such that discontinuation without active 
medical monitoring and management will produce a withdrawal syndrome at a level of severity noted in the criterion immediately above. 
AND 
• At least one of the following must be present:  
o Current signs or symptoms of moderate, severe. or potentia lly life -threatening withdrawal  
o Current signs or symptoms indicate that moderate, severe or potentially life- threatening 
withdrawal is imminent wi thout active medical management  
o Pattern and amount of recent/frequent substance use is such that moderate, severe or 
potentially life- threatening withdrawal is highly likely with discontinuation wi thout active 
medical management  
o Previous moderate, severe or life -threatening substance withdrawal from the same or 
similar substance(s) with a similar use pattern 
o Current signs or symptoms of physically severely intolerable withdrawal  
o Current signs or symptoms indicate that physically severely intolerable withdrawal is 
imminent without active medical management  
o Pattern and amount of recent/frequent substance use is such that physically severely 
intolerable withdrawal is highly likely with discontinuation without active medical 
management  
o Previous physically severely intolerable withdrawal from the same or similar substance(s) with a s imilar use pattern 
 Additional Considerations  
• Residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when detoxification 
admission is due to a programmatic requirement or standard procedure that all patients are 
initially admitted for detoxif ication  prior to residential treatment  
• Residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when the patient is being 
observed for possible withdrawal signs or symptoms without active medical management 
(sometimes referred  to as “social det oxification”)  
• Residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when done via ultra -rapid 
detoxification, aka anesthesia -assisted detoxification, aka anesthesia under heavy sedation  
• Residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when done via a program 
that consists of o r includes sauna detoxification  Page | 4 of 9  ∞ Criteria  
• Residential and sub -acute detoxification are not medically necessary when done via a program 
that consists of use of hot baths or hot tubs or Jacuzzi s without active medical management as 
defined below (see Definition of Terms ) 
• Residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when done via a program 
that consists of or  includes herbal detoxifi cation  
• Residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when done via a program 
that consists of or includes exercise as a major component  
• Residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when done via a program 
that consists of or includes hydration and /or nutrition without active medical management as 
defined below (see Definition of Terms ) 
• Residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when done via a program 
that consists of or includes oral or parenteral vitamins and/or mineral supplementation and/or 
amino acid supplementation and/or other supplements without active medical management as 
defined below (see Definition of Terms ) 
• Residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary for an isolated incident of 
acute intoxication. Instead, this may warrant “drying -out” in an observation bed 
• A court order does not make residential and sub- acute detoxification medically necessary. 
Symptom and intervention criteria must be met  
Symptom Criteria for Continued Stay  
At least one of the following must be present:  
• Continued signs or symptoms of moderate or severe or potentially life -threatening withdrawal   
• Continued signs or symptoms which indicate that moderate or severe or potentially life-
threatening withdrawal is likely without ongoing active medical ma nagement  
• Continued signs or symptoms of physically severely intolerable withdrawal  
• Continued signs or symptoms which indicate that physically severely intolerable withdrawal is 
likely without on going active medical management  
• Mild or no withdrawal signs and symptoms for a maximum of one full day, then discharge if 
there is no recurrence of moderate or severe withdrawal signs or symptoms 
• Mild withdrawal signs and symptoms from alcohol or benzodiazepine withdrawal with active 
medical management as defined below (see Definition of Terms ), and  less than 96 hours or 4 
days since last reported use of alcohol or a benzodiazepine  
 
Notes:  
Onset of DTs can occur up to 96 hours after last use of alcohol or a benzodiazepine even when withdrawal signs 
and symptoms are mild.   Page | 5 of 9  ∞ Criteria  
If the time of l ast use is not documented, so that 96 hours cannot be calculated, then 4 days is used as the closest 
approximation.  
 
Additional Considerations  
• Continued residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when the 
patient is being observed for possible withdrawal signs or symptoms without active medical 
management (sometimes referred to a s “social detoxification”)  
• Continued residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when 
continued stay is due to post- acute withdrawal syndrome (PAWS) symptoms. PAWS can last for 
up to 20 months after substance discontinuation and is manageable on an outpatient basis 
• Continued residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when 
continued stay is because discharge planning has not been started or completed  
• Continued residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when 
continued stay is because the patient is waiting for a residence or treatment placement  
• Continued residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when 
continued stay is due to uncertainty about or lack of an adequate family, living environment, peer, community, or other support system  
• Continued residential and sub-acute detoxification are not medically necessary when 
continued stay is due to patient or family non- compliance with treatment or discharge 
planning 
• A court order for any designated length of stay does not make residential and sub- acute 
detoxification medically necessary. Symptom and intervention criteria must be met  
Intervention Criteria for Admission and Continued Stay  
ALL of the following must be present:  
• A physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant must conduct an admission evaluation, 
including medical history, documentation of withdrawal signs and symptoms, and appropriate 
physical examination, within one day after admission, and must subsequently evaluate the 
patient  including an assessment of medical status, withdrawal signs and symptoms, medication 
regimen, and other continued treatment needs, at least once every day , either in- person or by 
a telehealth modality  
• Substance use evaluation must be completed during the first day of admission  
• Medication to manage or prevent withdrawal symptoms must be started during the first day of admission  
• Active medical management as defined below (see Definition of Terms
) must continue 
throughout the stay, except that medication to manage or prevent withdrawal symptoms may 
be discontinued :  Page | 6 of 9  ∞ Criteria  
o When withdrawal symptoms have become mild or have resolved , and discharge is planned  
for (and then o ccurs) no later than one day after withdrawal symptoms have been mild or 
absent for one full day   
OR 
o To confirm prior to discharge that medication for management of withdrawal is no longer 
needed , and discharge is planned  for (and then occurs)  the day after medication is 
discontinued, in the absence of recurrence of moderate or severe withdrawal symptoms 
• Nursing staff observation must be provided 24/7 
• Discharge planning must start within one day after admission  
 
Additional Consideration s 
• The attending clinician may be a licensed psychologist in states in which functioning as the attending clinician for substance use disorder residential treatment is within licensed 
psychologists’ legally- permitted scope of licensure. If a licensed psychologist functions as the 
attending clinician, she/he is required to perform all of the attending clinician services noted above and to provide active medical management as defined below (see Definition of Terms  
below)  
• Continued stays beyond 5 days should be referred for Secondary Review  
 
Note:  A small number of plans that are exempt from Federal mental health parity requirements 
may choose to maintain exclusion of coverage of residential treatment services including 
residential detoxification. 
 
Coding   
 
N/A 
 
Related Information   
 Page | 7 of 9  ∞ Definition of Terms  
As used throughout the criteria above, “active medical management ” (1) means daily use of 
medication(s) to treat or prevent withdrawal symptoms, (2) evaluation of the effects of such 
medication(s) at least once daily, with dose adjustments or medication changes when indicated, 
(3) physical examination components as appropriate for the withdrawal or potential withdrawal 
syndrome at least once daily and more often when indicated, (4) vital signs when indicated, and 
(5) laboratory testing as appropriate for the withdrawal or potential withdrawal syndrome when 
indicated. Observation for possible withdrawal symptoms following substance discontinuation 
withou t these components (sometimes referred to as “social detoxification”) does not constitute 
“active medical management.”  
 
References   
 
1. D Mee -Lee et al . The ASAM Criteria: Treatment Criteria for Addictive, Substance -Related, and Co -Occurring Conditions, Third 
Edition. The Change Companies, 2013.  
2. S Miller  et al. The ASAM Principles of Addiction Medicine, Sixth Edition. Wolters Kluwer, 201 9.  
3. American Psyc hiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition , Text Revision .  American 
Psychiatric  Association  Publishing, 20 22. 
 
History   
 
 
Date  Comments  
02/10/15  New UM Guideline, add to Mental Health section. Residential and sub -acute 
detoxification  may be considered medically necessary when all criteria are met. Policy 
effective date retro -active to May 2, 2016.  
05/02/16  Annual R eview. Guideline updated; criteria now reviewed by InterQual removed; that 
for sub-acute detoxification and residential detoxification is addressed within this 
guideline.  
09/01 /16 Interim U pdate , approved August 9, 2016 . Additions to Criteria, Additional 
Considerations.  Page | 8 of 9  ∞ Date  Comments  
02/01 /17 Annual Review , approved January 10, 2017 . Addition made to Intervention Criteria for 
Admission and Continued Stay that discharge planning must start within 24 hours of 
admission.  
03/01/17  Interim Review, approved February 14, 2017. Added #5 Symptom Criteria for 
Continued Stay.  
12/01/17 Interim R eview, approved November 9, 2017. Clarified that licensed psychologists can 
function as the attending clinician in states in which that is within their scope of licensure. The guideline  now indicates that Secondary Review is done for stays that 
exceed 5 days (previously the guideline  stated 7 days).  
06/01 /18 Interim R eview, approved May 3 , 2018.  Added “or” to criteria  for Residential and sub -
acute detoxification, which  are not medically necessary when done via a program that 
consists of or includes hydration and/or nutrition without active medical management.  
11/01 /18 Annual Review, approved October 26, 2018.  No changes to policy statement.  
11/01 /19 Annual Review, approved October 4, 2019. Literature review through September 2019, 
no changes to policy statements.  
04/01 /20 Interim Review, approved March 26 , 2020. The specification of an attending physician, 
NP, or PA was removed because actual practice not infrequently involves more than one medical clinician on different days. A provision was added to allow physician, NP, or PA evaluations either in-person or by telehealth because the number being done by 
telehealth is increasing significantly in actual practice, and because such evaluations 
are allowed by telehealth in all other hospital and facility based behavioral healthcare.  
11/01 /20 Annual Review, approved October 22 , 2020.  No changes to policy statements.  
08/01 /21 Annual Review, approved July 9 , 2021.  No changes to policy statements.  
05/01 /22 Annual Review, approved April 25, 2022. Minor wording corrections. Added comment 
that this level of care is the same as ASAM 3.7-WM. Modified criteria to allow for 
withdrawal of moderate severity in addition to severe severity, consistent with 
generally accepted standards of practice, and allowing for better differentiation from criteria for inpatient detoxification. Added exclusions for hot baths, hot tubs, and 
Jacuzzis without active medical management, and for oral or parenteral vitamins 
and/or mineral s upplementation and/or amino acid supplementation and/or other 
supplements without active medical management. For continued stay, added option of mild or no withdrawal signs and symptoms from alcohol or benzodiazepine withdrawal 
but less than 96 hours or 4 days since last reported use of alcohol or a 
benzodiazepine, and added accompanying Notes. Changed all citations of 24 hours to 
one day. Clarified that withdrawal signs and symptoms are an expected component of 
physician/nurse practitioner/physician assist ant evaluations. Changed the timeframe 
for substance use evaluations from 8 hours to during the first day of admission, 
consistent with generally accepted standards of practice. Clarified that medication to 
manage or prevent withdrawal symptoms must be started during the first day of 
admission. Clarified that medication to manage or prevent withdrawal symptoms may Page | 9 of 9  ∞ Date  Comments  
be discontinued when withdrawal symptoms have become mild or have resolved. 
Updated references 2 and 3 to the current editions.  
03/01 /23 Annual Review, approved, February 20 , 2023.   Deleted “or no” from “ Mild or no 
withdrawal signs and symptoms from alcohol or benzodiazepine withdrawal with 
active medical management as defined below (see Definition of Terms), and less than 
96 hours or 4 days since  last reported use of alcohol or a benzodiazepine ,” and 
adjusted accompanying Note accordingly, to clarify that the risk of withdrawal seizu res 
or DTs is only when at least some withdrawal signs or symptoms are still present.  
 
Disclaimer : This medical policy is a guide in evaluating the medical necessity of a particular service or treatment. The 
Company adopts policies after careful review of published peer -reviewed scientific literature, national guidelines and 
local standards of practice. Since medical t echnology is constantly changing, the Company reserves the right to review 
and update policies as appropriate. Member contracts differ in their benefits. Always consult the member benefit 
booklet or contact a member service representative to determine cove rage for a specific medical service or supply. 
CPT codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighted by the American Medical Association (AMA). © 2023  Premera 
All Rights Reserved.  
Scope : Medical policies are systematically developed guidelines that serve as a resource for Company staff when 
determining coverage for specific medical procedures, drugs or devices. Coverage for medical services is subject to 
the limits and conditions of the member benefit plan. Members and their providers should consult the member 
benefit booklet or contact a customer service representative to determine whether there are any benefit limitations 
applicable to this service or supply. This medical policy does not apply to Medicare Advantage.  Premera Blue Cross is a n independent licensee of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association  serving businesses and residents of Alaska and Washington State, excluding C lark County.   
052493  (07-01-2021) Discrimination is Against the Law  
Premera Blue Cross  (Premera) complies with applicable Federal and Washington state civil rights laws and does not discriminate on the basis of race, 
color, national o rigin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation . Premera does not exclude people or treat them differently because of race, 
color, national origin, age, disability , sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation.  Premera  provides free aids and services to people with disabilities to 
communica te effectively with us, such as q ualified sign language interpreters  and w ritten information in other formats (large print, audio, accessible 
electronic formats, other formats) . Premera p rovides fre e language services to people whose primary language is not English, such as  qualified interpreters  
and i nformation written in other languages . If you need these services, contact the Civil Rights Coordinator.  If you believe that Premera has failed to 
provide these services or discriminated in another way on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation , 
you can file a grievance with:  Civil Rights Coordinator ─ Complaints and Appeals , PO Box 91102 , Seattle, WA 98111 , Toll free : 855-332-4535 , Fax: 425-918-5592 , 
TTY: 711 , Email  AppealsDepartmentInquiries@Premera.com . You can file a grievance in person or by mail, fax, or email.  If you need help filing a 
grievance, the Civil Rights Coordinator is available to help you.  You can also file a civil rights complaint with the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office for Civil Rights, electronically through the Office for Civil Righ ts Complaint Portal, available at  https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/portal/lobby.jsf , 
or by mail or phone at:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,  200 Independence Ave SW, Room 509F, HHH B uilding , Washington, D.C. 20201, 
1-800-368-1019,  800-537-7697 (TDD). Complaint forms are available at  http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/office/file/index.html .  
Washington  residents : You can also file a civil rights complaint wi th the Washington State Office of the Insurance Commissioner, electronically through 
the Office of the Insurance Commissioner Complaint Portal available at https://www.insurance.wa.gov/file -complaint -or-check -your-complaint -status , or by 
phone at 800 -562-6900, 360 -586-0241 (TDD). Complaint forms are available at https: //fortress.wa.gov/oic/onlineservices/cc/pub/complaintinformation.aspx .  
Alaska  residents : Contact the Alaska Division of Insurance via email at insurance@alaska.gov , or by phone at 907-269-7900 or 1 -800-INSURAK  (in-state, 
outside Anchorage) . 
Language Assistance  
ATENCIÓN : si habla español, tiene a su disposición servicios gratuitos de asistencia lingüística. Llame al 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
PAUNAWA : Kung nagsasalita ka ng Tagalog , maaari kang gumamit ng mga serbisyo ng tulong sa wika nang walang bayad. Tumawag sa  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
注意：如果您使用繁體中文，您可以免費獲得語言援助服務。請致電  800-722-1471  (TTY：711）。 
CHÚ Ý : Nếu bạn nói Tiếng Việt, có các dịch vụ hỗ trợ ngôn ngữ miễn phí dành cho b ạn.  Gọi số 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711). 
주의: 한국어를  사용하시는  경우, 언어 지원 서비스를  무료로  이용하실  수 있습니다 . 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711)  번으로  전화해  주십시오 . 
ВНИМАНИЕ : Если вы говорите на русском языке, то вам доступны бесплатные услуги перевода.  Звоните  800-722-1471  (телетайп: 711). 
LUS CEEV : Yog tias koj hais lus Hmoob , cov kev pab txog lus, muaj  kev pab dawb  rau koj. Hu rau 800-722-1471  (TTY:  711).  
MO LOU SILAFIA : Afai e te tautala  Gagana fa'a Sāmoa, o loo iai auaunaga  fesoasoan, e fai fua e leai se totogi, mo oe,  Telefoni mai:  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ໂປດຊາບ: ຖ້າວ່າ ທ່ານເວ ້າພາສາ ລາວ, ການບໍລິການຊ່ວຍເຫ  ຼື ອດ້ານພາສາ, ໂດຍບໍ່ເສ ັ ຽຄ່າ, ແມ່ນມ ີພ້ອມໃຫ້ທ່ານ. ໂທຣ 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711) . 
注意事項 ：日本語を話される場合、無料の言語支援をご利用いただけます。 800-722-1471  （TTY:711）まで、お電話にてご連絡ください。  
PAKDAAR : Nu saritaem ti Ilocano, ti serbisyo para ti baddang ti lengguahe nga awanan bayadna, ket sidadaan para kenyam.  Awagan ti  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
УВАГА!  Якщо ви розмовляєте українською мовою, ви можете звернутися до безкоштовної служби мовної підтримки.  Тел ефонуйте за 
номером 800 -722-1471  (телетайп:  711). 
ប្រយ័ត្ន៖   បរើសិនជាអ្នកនិយាយ  ភាសាខ្មែរ , បសវាជំនួយខ្ននកភាសា បោយមិនគិត្ឈ្ ន ួល គឺអាចមានសំរារ់រំបរ ើ អ្នក។  ចូរ ទូរស័ព្ទ   800-722-1471 ( TTY: 711)។ 
ማስታወሻ :  የሚናገሩት  ቋንቋ ኣማርኛ  ከሆነ የትርጉም  እርዳታ ድርጅቶች፣  በነጻ ሊያግዝዎት  ተዘጋጀተዋል፡  ወደ ሚከተለው  ቁጥር ይደውሉ  800-722-1471 (መስማት  ለተሳናቸው : 711). 
XIYYEEFFANNAA : Afaan  dubbattu  Oroomiffa , tajaajila  gargaarsa  afaanii , kanfaltiidhaan  ala, ni argama . Bilbilaa  800-722-1471 ( TTY: 711).  
ملحوظة:  إذا كنت تتحدث اذكر اللغة، فإن خدمات المساعدة اللغوية تتوافر لك بالمجان.  اتصل برقم   1471-722-800    :(رقم هاتف الصم والبكم711 .) 
ਧਿਆਨ  ਧਿਓ: ਜੇ ਤੁਸੀਂ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ  ਬੋਲਿੇ ਹੋ, ਤਾਂ ਭਾਸ਼ਾ ਧ ਿੱਚ ਸਹਾਇਤਾ  ਸੇ ਾ ਤੁਹਾਡੇ ਲਈ ਮੁਫਤ ਉਪਲਬਿ  ਹੈ। 800-722-1471 (TTY:  711) 'ਤੇ ਕਾਲ ਕਰੋ। 
เรียน : ถ้าคุณพูดภาษาไทยคุณสามารถใช้บริการช่วยเหลือทางภาษาได้ฟรี  โทร 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ACHTUNG : Wenn Sie Deutsch sprechen, stehen Ihnen kostenlos sprachliche Hilfsdienstleistungen zur Verfügung. Rufnummer: 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
UWAGA : Jeżeli mówisz po polsku, możesz skorzystać z bezpłatnej pomocy językowej. Zadzwoń pod numer 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATANSYON : Si w pale Kreyòl Ayisyen, gen sèvis èd pou lang ki disponib gratis pou ou.  Rele 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATTENTION  : Si vous parlez français, des services d'aide linguistique vous sont proposés gratuitement.  Appelez le 800 -722-1471  (ATS :  711).  
ATENÇÃO : Se fala português, encontram -se disponíveis serviços linguísticos, grátis.  Ligue para 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATTENZIONE : In caso la lingua parlata sia l'italiano, sono disponibili servizi di assistenza linguistica gratuiti. Chiamare il numero  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).   
 توجه: اگر به زبان فارسی گفتگو می کنید، تسهیالت زبانی بصورت رايگان برای شما فراهم می باشد. با   (TTY: 711) 1471-722-800   .تماس بگیريد 