 
 Medical Necessity Guidelines:  
Applied Behavior Analysis  (ABA ) Including 
Early Intervention for Tufts Health RITogether  
 
6016077                                 
 1   Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Including Early 
Intervention for Tufts Health RITogether   
Effective:  November  1, 2023  
Prior Authorization Required  
If REQUIRED , submit supporting clinical documentation pertinent to service request  to the FAX 
numbers below  Yes ☒ No ☐  
Notification Required  
IF REQUIRED,  concurrent review may apply  Yes ☐ No ☒ 
 
Applies  to: 
Commercial  Products  
☐ Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Commercial products ; 800-232-0816  
☐ Tufts Health Plan Commercial products ; 617-972-9409  
  CareLinkSM – Refer to CareLink Procedures, Services and Items Requiring Prior Authorization  
 
Public Plans Products  
☐ Tufts Health Direct – A Massachusett s Qualified Health Plan (QHP) (a commercial product) ; 888-415-9055  
☐ Tufts Health Together – MassHealth MCO Plan and Accountable Care Partnership Plans ; 888-415-9055  
☒ Tufts Health RITogether – A Rhode Island Medicaid Plan; 857-304-6404  
☐ Tufts Healt h Unify * – OneCare Plan (a dual -eligible product) ; 857-304-6304  
*The MNG applies to Tufts Health Unify members unless a less restrictive LCD or NCD exists.  
 
Senior Products  
☐ Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Stride Medicare Advantage;  866-874-0857  
☐ Tufts Health Plan Senior Care Options (SCO), (a dual -eligible product) ; 617-673-0965  
☐ Tufts Medicare Preferred HMO, (a Medicare Advantage product) ; 617-673-0965  
☐ Tufts Medicare Preferred PPO , (a Medicare Advantage product) ; 617-673-0965  
 
Note:  While you may not be the provider responsible for obtaining prior authorization or notifying Point32Health, as a 
condition of payment you will need to ensure that any necessary  prior authorization has been obtained and/or 
Point32Health has received proper  notification.  If notification is required, providers may  additionally  be required to provide 
updated clinical information to qualify for continued service.   
 
Overview  
Applied behavioral analysis (ABA) is the design, implementation, and evaluation of envir onmental modifications, using 
behavioral stimuli and consequences, to produce socially significant improvement in human behavior, including the use of 
direct observation, measurement, and functional analysis of the relationship between environment and beha vior. 
“Involvement by parents [legal guardians] is considered essential to long- term treatment success; parents [legal guardians]  
are taught to continue behavioral modification training” . 
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by difficulties in social 
interaction, impaired communication (both verbal and nonverbal), and repetitive, restrictive behaviors that present in early 
childhood. ASD has heterogeneous etiology and comorbidities. Diagnostic criteria and nomenclature for these disorders has changed over the years and, while the current terminology in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 5 (DSM 5) uses a 
single category called Autism Spectrum Disorders, previous versions divided this into multiple subc ategories.  
Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA) services are defined according to the Behavior Analyst Certification Board as the 
following:  
“ABA is a well -developed scientific discipline among the helping professions that focuses on the analysis, design,  
implementation, and evaluation of social and other environmental modifications to produce meaningful changes in human behavior. ABA includes the use of direct observation, measurement, and functional analysis of the relations between 
environment and behav ior. ABA uses changes in environmental events, including antecedent stimuli and consequences, to  
 
 Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Including 
Early Intervention for Tufts Health RITogether   
2     produce practical and significant changes in behavior.”  
Types of ABA include, but are not limited to, discrete trial training, verbal behavioral intervention, and pivot response training. 
Parental and caregiver involvement in the process and continued use of the strategies outside of the formal sessions is 
important for the success of the treatment in the long- term.  
The individual ABA treatment plan is devel oped by a Licensed, Applied Behavior Analyst. The actual one -on-one sessions 
are typically provided by behavioral technicians or paraprofessionals with services ranging in hours of Member contact per week based on the severity of symptoms and intensity of treatment. The technician is supervised by the Licensed, Applied 
Behavior Analyst.  
Treatment may be provided in a variety of settings, such as at home and in the community. ABA services covered under a health benefit plan are typically delivered by a con tracted and credentialed provider in a home or community setting. 
Services provided in a school setting are distinct and separate from those covered by the health plan and are typically 
covered by the educational system’s special education resources as par t of the Individual Education Plan (IEP) pursuant to 
Public Law 94- 142. 
ABA is typically an extremely intensive treatment program designed to address challenging behavior as defined in our 
admission criteria. It can occur in any number of settings, including, home, agencies, and hospitals.  
Early intervention services are covered for members under age 3 years old. Early intervention services
1 means, but is not 
limited to, speech and language therapy, occupation therapy, physical therapy, evaluation, case management, nutrition, service plan development and review, nursing services, and assistive technology services and devices for dependents fr om 
birth to age three (3); who are certified by the Department of Human Services as eligible for services under Part C of the 
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) (20 U.S.C. Section 1471 et seq.). Early intervention coverage is limited t o 
a benefit of $5,000
2 per dependent child member per calendar year.  
The Plan may authorize ABA therapy visits, for Members <15 years of age.  
 
Clinical Guideline Coverage Criteria  
After a comprehensive evaluation and a referral (as needed) when ALL of the fo llowing are met:  
 
ADMISSION CRITERIA  
The Plan considers admission for ABA Therapy as reasonable and medically necessary for ASD when ALL of the following 
criteria are met:  
1. Member has a definitive diagnosis of an Autism Spectrum Disorder (DSM 5 ), or an Aut istic Disorder/Asperger’s 
Disorder/ Pervasive Developmental Disorder -Not Otherwise Specified (PDD -NOS ) diagnosis (DSM IV) ; and  
2. The diagnosis in criterion 1 above is made by a licensed physician or psychologist experienced in the diagnosis 
and treatment of autism with developmental or child /adolescent expertise; and  
3. Member  has received a comprehensive diagnostic and/or functional assessment ( e.g., ABLLS- R, Vineland- II, ADI -
R, ADOS- G, CARS2, VB- MAPP, or Autism Behavior Checklist), which include  ALL of the following:  
a. Complete medical history includes pre- and perinatal, medical, developmental, family, and social elements;  
and  
b. Physical examination, which may include items such as growth parameters, head circumference, and a 
neurologic examination;  and  
c. Detailed behavioral and functional evaluation outlining the behaviors consistent with the diagnosis of ASD 
and its associated comorbidities. A diagnostic evaluation must include the scores from the use of formal 
diagnostic tests and scales as well as observation and history of behaviors. Screening scales such as the MCHAT -R are not sufficient to make a diagnosis and will not be accepted as the only formal scale; and  
d. Medical screening and testing have  been completed to identify the etiology of the di sorder, rule out treatable 
causes, and identify associated comorbidities as indicated; and 
4. Member exhibits atypical or disruptive behavior that significantly interferes with daily functioning and activities or 
that poses a risk to Member or others related to aggression, self -injury, property destruction, etc.; and 
5. Initial evaluation from a Licensed Applied Behavior Analyst supports the request for the ABA services ; and 
6. The diagnostic report clearly states the diagnosis and the evidence used to make that diagnosi s; and  
7. If early intervention: Member, < 3 years of age, has a valid referral from their primary care physician to early 
intervention services and has been accepted by early intervention for intensive services.  
a. From initial evaluation through the entire course of treatment, all the requirements listed in the Rhode Island 
 
 
1 Rhode Island General Laws, Chapter 27 -41-68 
 
2 100% of Early Intervention Services in excess of $5,000 will be paid at the current State- approved Medicaid rate.  
 
 Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Including 
Early Intervention for Tufts Health RITogether   
3     Executive Office of Health and Human Services early intervention certification standards policies and 
procedures must be met .3 
 
CONTINUING STAY CRITERIA  
The Plan considers continuation of ABA Therapy as reasonable and medically necessary for ASD when ALL of the following 
are met:   
1. Member’s  condition continues to meet admission criteria for ABA, either due to continuation of presenting problems, or 
appearance of new problems or symptoms ; and 
2. There is reasonable expectation that the individual will benefit from the continuation of ABA services. Treatment planning 
is individualized and appropriate to the Member’s  changing condition with realistic and specific goals and objectives 
stated. The treatment plan is updated based on treatment progress including the addition of new target behaviors ; and 
3. Initial assessment from a Licensed Behavior Analyst supports the request for ABA services ; and 
4. Member's progress is monitored regularly evidenced by behavioral graphs, progress notes, and daily session notes. 
The treatment plan is to be modified, if ther e is no measurable progress toward decreasing the frequency, intensity 
and/or duration of the targeted behaviors and/or increase in skills for skill acquisition to achieve targeted goals and 
objectives ; and  
5. There is documented skills transfer to Member  and treatment transition planning from the beginning of treatment ; and  
6. There is a documented active attempt at coordination of care with relevant providers/caretakers, etc., when appropriate. 
If coordination is not successful, the reasons are documented; and 
7. Parent(s) and/or guardian(s) involvement in the training of behavioral techniques must be documented in Member’s 
medical record and is critical to the generalization of treatment goals to Member’s environment ; and 
8. Services are not duplicative of services  that are part of an Individual Educational Plan (IEP) or Individual Service Plan 
(ISP) when applicable.  
 
DISCHARGE CRITERIA  
The Plan considers discharge from ABA Therapy as reasonable and medically necessary when ONE of the following is met:   
1. Member’s i ndividual treatment plan and goals have been met ; or  
2. Member  has achieved adequate stabilization of the challenging behavior and less -intensive modes of treatment are 
appropriate and indicated; or 
3. Member  no longer meets admission criteria, or meets criteri a for a less or more intensive services ; or 
4. Treatment is making the symptoms persistently worse; or  
5. Member  is not making progress toward treatment goals, as demonstrated by the absence of any documented 
meaningful (i.e., durable and generalized) measurable improvement or stabilization of challenging behavior and there 
is no reasonable expectation of progress ; or  
6. Home environment presents safety risks to staff9; or 
7. Parent/guardian is not successfully following program rules10 
 
Limitations  
The Plan considers ABA therapy as not medically necessary for the following conditions : 
1. Member  has medical conditions or impairments that would prevent beneficial utilization of services.  
2. Member  requires the 24- hour medical/nursing monitoring or procedures provided in a hospital setting.  
3. The services are primarily for school or educational purpos es.  
4. The treatment is investigational or unproven, including, but not limited to facilitated communication, Auditory Integration 
Therapy (AIT), Holding Therapy, and Higashi (Daily Life Therapy).  
 
Codes  
The Member must have one of the following ICD -10 diagnoses to be considered for coverage. Please refer to the Autism 
Professional Payment Policy  for information regarding billing instructions for these services.  
Table 1: ICD-10-CM Codes  
 
 
3 Rhode Island Executive Office of Health and Human Services Early Intervention Certification Standards, April, 2016.   
 
 Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Including 
Early Intervention for Tufts Health RITogether   
4     Code s Description  
F84.0  Autistic disorder  
F84.3  Other childhood disintegrative disorder  
F84.5  Asperger's syndrome  
F84.8  Other pervasive developmental disorders  
F84.9  Pervasive developmental disorder, unspecified  
 
Table 2: CPT/HCPCS Codes  
The following code(s) require prior authorization:  
Code s  Description  
H2014  Specialized treatment consultation – occupational therapist, per 15 minutes  
H2014 -HO Treatment consultation (master level clinician)  
H2014 -HP Treatment consultation (doctoral level clinician)  
H0046  Lead Therapy  
H0046 -HO Clinical supervision – master level clinician. Behavioral health services, not otherwise specified  
H0046 -HP Clinical supervision – doctoral level clinician. Behavioral health services, not otherwise specified  
S9446  Patient Education – Social Skills Group  
T1013  Sign language or oral interpreter services, (up to 8 hours per month, 4 for supervision and 4 for parent 
training, not to be used with direct service)  
T1016  Treatment Coordination  
T1024  Home Based Therapy – Specialized Treatment/Treatment Support  
 References:  
1. State of Rhode Island Executive Office of Health and Human Services, Certification Standards, Providers of HBTS 
(Inclusive of ABA), January 2016.  
2. State  of Rhode Island, EOHHS Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Therapy Fact Sheet, Rev. 3/1/2016.  
3. Contract between State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations EOHHS and Tufts Health Public Plans, Inc., for Medicaid Managed Care Services, March 1, 2017, Attac hment O: Mental Health, Substance Use and Developmental 
Disabilities Services for Children.  
4. Rhode Island Executive Office of Health and Human Services Early Intervention Certification Standards, April 2016.  
5. The Executive Office of Health and Human Services , State of Rhode Island, Provider Manuals & Guidelines, CEDAR 
Family Centers, Certification Standards Providers of Home -Based  Therapeutic  Services: Accessed at 
eohhs.ri.gov/providers -partners/provider -directories/cedarr -services; on August 2, 2021  
6. Comparative Effectiveness Review of Intensive Behavioral Intervention for Treatment of Autism Spectrum Disorder, 
Comparative Effectiveness Review Mar 13, 2019,  Annual Review: Jun 5, 2020. Available at hayesinc.com. Last 
accessed August 24, 2021.  
7. Geller, 1972; Lovaas, 1987; Smith et al, 2000; Butler et al., 2003; Shea, 2004 quoted in Hayes, Inc.,  
8. Intensive Behavioral Intervention Therapy for Autism., 2012; page 7 
9. EOHHS, State of Rhode Island, Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Therapy Fact Sheet, rev. January  2016  
10. EOHHS, State of Rhode Island, Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Therapy Fact Sheet, rev. January  2016  
 
Approval And Revision History 
August 18, 2021: Reviewed by the Medical Policy Approval Committee (MPAC) , removal of codes H0031, H0032, H2012, 
H2019, S9128, S9129, and S9131. Addition of codes H0046, S9446, T1013, T1016, and T1024.  
Subsequent endorsement date(s) and changes made:  
• September 15, 2021: Reviewed by IMPAC, renewed without changes  
• April 5, 2022: Template updated   
 
 Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Including 
Early Intervention for Tufts Health RITogether   
5     • September 21, 2022: Reviewed by Medical Policy Approval Committee (MPAC), renewed without changes  
• August 16, 2023: Reviewed by MPAC, renewed without changes, template updated effective November 1, 2023  
 
Background, Product and Disclaimer  Information 
Medical Necessity Guidelines are developed to determine coverage for benefits and are published to provide a better 
understanding of the basis upon which coverage decisions are made. We make coverage decisions using these guidelines, along wit h the Member’s benefit document, and in coordination with the Member’s physician(s) on a case- by-case basis 
considering the individual Member's health care needs.  
Medical Necessity Guidelines are developed for selected therapeutic or diagnostic services f ound to be safe and proven 
effective in a limited, defined population of patients or clinical circumstances. They include concise clinical coverage crit eria 
based on current literature review, consultation with practicing physicians in our service area who are medical experts in 
the particular field, FDA and other government agency policies, and standards adopted by national accreditation organizations. We revise and update Medical Necessity Guidelines annually, or more frequently if new evidence becomes 
available that suggests needed revisions.  
For self -insured plans, coverage may vary depending on the terms of the benefit document. If a discrepancy exists between 
a Medical Necessity Guideline and a self -insured Member’s benefit document, the provisions of  the benefit document will 
govern. For Tufts Health Together (Medicaid), coverage may be available beyond these guidelines for pediatric members 
under age 21 under the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) benefits of the plan in accordance 
with 130 CMR 450.140 and 130 CMR 447.000, and with prior authorization.  
Treating providers are solely responsible for the medical advice and treatment of Members. The use of this guideline is not 
a guarantee of payment or a final prediction of how specific claim(s) will be adjudicated. Claims payment is subject to 
eligibility and benefits on the date of service, coordination of benefits, referral/authorization, utilization management 
guidelines when applicable, and adherence to plan policies, plan procedures, and claims editing logic.  
 