 
 
Corporate Medical Policy  
Page 1 of 26  
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 
Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
File Name:  allergen_testing  
01/01/2019  
04/2023  Origination:  
Last Review:  
 
Description of Procedure or Service  
 Allergic disease is characterized by inappropriate or exaggerated rated immune reactions to foreign 
antigens (allergens) that are generally innocuous to most people, but when introduced into a 
genetically -predisposed individual, elicit a hypersensitivity r eaction (Hamilton, 2021). 
Hypersensitivity reactions can be classified into four types, two of which are associated with allergy, type I immediate immunoglobulin E (IgE) reactions and type IV T cell mediated reactions (K.-L. Chang & J. C. Guarderas, 2018). Type I reactions involve the formation of IgE antibodies 
specific to the allergen. When the subject is re- exposed to that allergen, the allergen binds multiple 
IgE molecules, resulting in the release of an array of inflammatory mediators, including histam ines, 
that precipitate the symptoms of allergic disease (Hamilton, 2021).  
 
Allergen testing in serum is designed to detect the presence of allergen specific IgE. A positive test for allergen specific IgE  confirms the presence of the antibody only. Actual reactivity must be 
determined by history or supervised challenge (Kowal & DuBuske, 2022). Several diagnostic 
procedures have been developed to elicit and assess hypersensitivity reactions including 
epicut aneous, intradermal, patch, bronchial, exercise, and ingestion challenge tests (Bernstein et al., 
2008).  
 
***Note: This Medical Policy is complex and technical. For questions concerning the technical  
language  and/or specific clinical indications for its use, please consult your physician.  
 
Policy  
 BCBSNC will provide coverage for  allergen testing when it is determined the medical criteria or 
reimbursement guidelines below are met.  
 
Benefits Application  
 This medical policy relates only to the servic es or supplies described herein . Please refer to the Member's 
Benefit Booklet for availability of benefits. Member's benefits may vary according to benefit design; 
therefore  member benefit language should be reviewed before applying the terms of this medical policy.  
 
When  Allergen Testing is covered  
 1. Reimbursement is allowed for specific IgE in -vitro allergy testing  in any of the following 
situations : 
a. In lieu of skin testing for an initial  allergy screen.  
b. When skin testing is contraindicated (see Note 1) .  
c.    W hen further treatment decisions would be impacted by confirmation of sensitivity in 
individuals for whom direct skin testing results are not consistent with the history of an 
anaphylactic or other severe reaction to an allergen .  Page 2 of 26  
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
2. When limited to allergens c hosen for testing based on an individual’s history, physical 
examination, and environment, specific IgE in- vitro allergy testing (up to 20 allergen 
specific antibodies per year) , reimbursement is allowed .  
 
3. Reimbursement is allowed for in -vitro testing for total serum IgE in any of the following 
situations :  
a. For i ndividuals with moderate to severe asthma being considered for Xolair therapy. 
b. For i ndividuals who are suspected of having allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis . 
 
4.    To monitor for allergy resolution in children and adolescents with an initial positive food 
allergen result(s), reimbursement is allowed for annual re -testing for the same food 
allergen(s) .  
 
When Allergen Testing is not covered  
 1. In the absence of a new clinical presentation, routine re -testing for allergies to the same 
allergens (except where specified above) , reimbursement is not allowed .   
 
2. Reimbursement is not allowed for  in-vitro testing of IgG, IgA, IgM , and/or  IgD in the 
evaluation of suspected allergy.   
 
3. Reimbursement is not allowed for  basophil activation flow cytometry testing (BAT)  for 
measuring hypersensitivity to allergens .   
 
4. Reimbursement is not allowed for  the antigen l eukocyte antibody test (ALCAT)   
 
5.    Reimbursement is not allowed for in- vitro allergen testing using bead- based epitope assays 
(e.g., VeriMAP Peanut Dx ).  
 
5. For all situations, in -vitro testing using qualitative specific IgE multi -allergen screen that 
does not identify a specific allergen , reimbursement is not allowed.  
 
Notes:  
Note 1: Skin testing is contraindicated in the following situations:  
• Patients who have certain skin conditions (e.g., dermatographism, urticaria, cutaneous mastocytosis , atopic dermatitis, severe diffuse psoriasis)  
• Patients who are taking medications that may interfere with the treatment of anaphylaxis (e.g., Beta -blockers and Angiotensin Converting Enzyme inhibitors) or may impair skin test 
sensitivity (e.g., tricycl ic antidepressants, antihistamines)  
• Patients who are at high risk to testing (e.g., poorly controlled asthma, clinical history of 
severe reaction to minute amounts of allergen, cardiac arrhythmia, unstable angina)  
• Patients who have experienced an anaphylactic event within the past one month  
• Uncooperative patients (e.g., small children, individuals with mental or physical 
impairments)  
 
Policy Guidelines  
 Table of Terminology  
 
Term  Definition  
AAAAI  The American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology  
AAAI  Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology  
AAFP  American Academy of Family Physicians  
AAP  American Academy of Pediatrics  Page 3 of 26  
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
ACAAI  American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology  
ACD  Allergic contact dermatitis  
ACR  American cockroach  
AIT Allergen immunotherapy  
ALCAT  The Antigen Leukocyte Antibody Test  
AR Allergic rhinitis  
Arah2 -sIgE  Arachis hypogaea  2-specific IgE  
ARIA  Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma  
ATP  Atopy patch test  
AUC  Area under the curve  
BAT  Basophil activation flow cytometry testing  
BAT  Basophil  activation  test 
BBEA  Peanut bead -based epitope assay  
CAA  Current allergic asthma  
CAR  Current allergic rhinitis  
CBS  Consensus based statements  
CD4+  Cluster of differentiation 4  
CLIA ’88  Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988  
CLSI  Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute  
CMS  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services  
CRS  Chronic rhinosinusitis  
CW Choosing wisely  
EAACI  European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology  
EDTA  Ethylenediaminetetraacetic Acid  
EP Expert panel  
FA Food allergy  
FcεRI  High -affinity IgE receptor  
FDA  The Food and Drug Administration  
FEV1  Forced expiratory volume in 1 second  
GA2LEN  Global Allergy and Asthma European Network  
H1 H-1 receptor antagonists  
H2 H-2 receptor antagonists  
IgA Immunoglobulin A  
IgD Immunoglobulin D  
IgE Immunoglobulin E  
IgE-FAB  Immunoglobulin E - fragment antigen -binding region  
IgG Immunoglobulin G  
IgG4  Immunoglobulin A  
IgM Immunoglobulin A  
JTFPP  Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters  
LCDs  Local coverage determinations  
LDTs  Laboratory -developed tests  
LEAP  Learning early about peanut allergy  Page 4 of 26  
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
MBB  Mucosal brush biopsies  
MFI Median fluorescence intensity  
NASEM  The National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine  
NIAID  National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases  
NICE  National Institute for Health and Care Excellence  
NPV  Negative predictive value  
NSAIDs  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  
OFC  Oral food challenge   
PAMD@  Precision allergy molecular diagnostic applications  
PPV Positive predictive value  
RARS  Recurrent acute rhinosinusitis  
SAR  Seasonal allergic rhinitis  
sIgE Specific immunoglobulin E  
s-IgE Specific immunoglobulin E  
SPT Skin prick tests  
SSRIs  Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors  
ST Skin test  
Th2 T helper type 2  
tIgE Total immunoglobulin E   
WAO  World Allergy Organization  
 
Background  
 
Allergies affect over 50 million Americans, including approximately 30 percent of adults and 40 
percent of children (Jackson et al., 2013; NASEM, 2016). The incidence of allergic disease is 
increasing (Pawankar et al., 2013) and is estimated to result in over $17 billion in health care costs 
and 200,000 emergency department visits annually (Adams et al., 2013).  
 
A majority of environmental, food, and medication allergies with clinical significance are type I 
immunoglobulin E (IgE) -mediated allergies (Kowal & DuBuske, 2022). Diagnosis of a n IgE -
mediated allergy involves identification of the allergen, demonstration of IgE specific to that 
allergen, and confirmation that symptoms occur when the patient is exposed to the allergen. The IgE 
response to an allergen can be assessed using skin or serum testing. Patch testing is preferred for 
delayed T -cell mediated response (K. -L. Chang & J. C. Guarderas, 2018; Zug et al., 2014).  
 
Allergic diseases, respiratory infections, and autoimmune conditions have similar clinical 
presentations and self -repor ted symptoms have a relatively low positive predictive value (PPV) 
(Sampson et al., 2014). Thus, laboratory allergy and immunologic testing are useful in clarifying diagnosis and guiding treatment when the frequency, duration, and sequelae of upper respira tory 
infections exceed the norm or when rhinosinusitis or asthma symptoms persist despite treatment 
(Chow et al., 2012). Allergy testing is also useful in identifying causative allergen in atopic 
dermatitis (eczema), contact dermatitis, urticaria, angioedema, and food or drug allergies. Knowing 
the causal allergen helps provide clinically relevant information for avoidance and treatment (K.- L. 
Chang & J. C. Guarderas, 2018).  
 
Skin Testing  
 
Skin testing is the most rapid, sensitive, and cost -effective testing modality for the detection of 
immunoglobulin E (IgE) -mediated disease. The procedure lasts less than an hour with minimal Page 5 of 26  
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
patient discomfort. There are several published practice parameters for allergen skin testing 
(Bernstein et al. , 2008; K.- L. Chang & J. C. Guarderas, 2018; Kowal & DuBuske, 2022).  
 
Serum IgE  
 IgE is one of five immunoglobulins and the one primarily involved in allergic disease. At the 
cellular level, the allergic response starts with “atopy,” a genetic predisposition to produce specific 
IgE after exposure to allergens. CD4+ helper T cells are pred isposed to the “T helper type 2” (Th2) 
response, which causes the Th2 cells to secrete large amounts of interleukins 4 and 13, which then 
promotes production of the allergen specific IgE. From there, the allergen- specific IgE binds to 
high- affinity recepto rs on mast cells and basophils. At this point, if the relevant allergen is ingested 
in large enough amounts, the IgE molecules may cluster (cross -linking). This cross -linking causes 
the mast cells and basophils to release chemical and protein mediators, resulting in the characteristic 
allergic response (Stokes & Casale, 2022).   
 
Immunoassays measuring both total IgE and allergen specific IgE in serum and other bodily fluids 
have been developed. Specific IgE immunoassays do not require patient cooperation, are not limited 
in patients with skin disease, are not blocked by antihistamines, and pose no risk of adverse 
reactions (Bernstein et al., 2008; K. -L. Chang & J. C. Guarderas, 2018; Kowal & DuBuske, 2021; 
Stokes & Casale, 2022). Total IgE is usually unrela ted to IgE levels for a specific allergen but may 
be useful in other conditions, such as asthma (Stokes & Casale, 2022).  
 
Other testing  
 Patch testing is the gold standard for identification of a contact allergen (Mowad, 2006; Rietschel, 
1997). Although oc clusive patch testing is the most common technique, open, prophetic 
(provocative), repeated insult, photopatch, and atopy patch tests are also available if special 
situations indicate their use (Bernstein et al., 2008).  
 
Cellular activation assays measurin g the release of histamine from basophils (Kim et al., 2016; 
Santos & Lack, 2016) or mast cells (Bahri et al., 2018) as diagnostic or prognostic indicators of allergy have been the subject of intense research. Basophil and eosinophilic reactivity tests hav e 
been found to be associated with food- induced allergic responses and have been shown in current 
research to be modified over time during immunotherapy (Sampson et al., 2014). In particular, the basophil activation test (BAT) has emerged as having superior specificity and comparable 
sensitivity to diagnose food allergies when compared with skin prick test and specific IgE (Santos & 
Shreffler, 2017). Histamine release from leukocytes of allergic persons is an excellent in vitro 
correlate of allergy; however , it is currently still considered a research test by the Academy of 
Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (AAAI) (Bernstein et al., 2008).  
 
BAT has the potential to be a useful tool for measuring hypersensitivity to allergens, especially for 
patients who are no t suitable for skin testing due to skin status or prior severe reactions since it is an 
ex vivo, flow cytometry- based assay. BAT, for use as standard clinical practice, is currently limited 
by its lack of standardization in methodology as well as between s ystems used. A study by Depince -
Berger et al. (2017) has proposed standardization between systems and instruments using whole 
blood- ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) samples with instrumentation standardization. “BAT 
would strongly benefit from easy i mplementation [EDTA, one step stimulation/labeling, wash, full 
sample analysis over time parameter, B cell relative basophil count] and standardization of 
instrument settings on MFI [median fluorescence intensity] targets whatever system or instrument is 
used” (Depince- Berger et al., 2017). Hemmings et al. (2018) note that standardization, quality 
assurance, and clinical validation will facilitate the transition of the BAT from research to clinical 
practice.  
 Proprietary Testing  
 Page 6 of 26  
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
The Antigen Leukocyte Antibody Test (ALCAT) is another test available for the assessment of 
allergens. ALCAT measures food/immune reactions through stimulation of leukocytes. The 
immunological reactions to this stimulation are intended to identify sensitiv ities regardless of 
pathway as antibodies do not necessarily need to be involved. CellScienceSystems suggests individuals with a variety of disorders (such as gastrointestinal, neurological, et al.) to take this test 
(CellScienceSystems, 2021). Although the ALCAT machine is FDA registered and there are a few 
papers published, results are not reproducible when subject to rigorous testing and do not correlate 
with clinical evidence of allergy (Beyer & Teuber, 2005; Hammond & Lieberman, 2018; Wuthrich, 
2005).  
 Panels encompassing a large number of analytes are also offered by labs. For example, Genova 
Diagnostics offers a blood test for IgG and IgE antibodies for 87 different foods. Genova also offers 
several variations on this test, such as “Vegetarian” (21 fo ods), “Spices” (23 spices), “Molds” (15 
molds), and more (Genova, 2021).  
 Spiriplex offers a microarray -style panel for allergen testing, called “Allergenex.” This test contains 
many purified allergen proteins to which a patient’s blood sample can bind. This binding creates a quantifiable signal that allows the user to identify the number of IgE antibodies present, and 
therefore provide a picture of allergy. Spiriplex offers a test for 28 common food allergens, a test for 
40 inhalant allergens, and 68 combi ned food and inhalant allergens (Spiriplex, 2021).  
 
The VeriMAP Peanut Dx and the VeriMAP™ Peanut Sensitivity are both peanut -allergen specific 
bead -based epitope assays manufactured by AllerGenis LLC. According to Allergenis, VeriMAP™ 
has a “95% positive  predictive value and can reduce overdiagnosis and anxiety by minimizing false 
positives” (BioSpace, 2021). This is an emerging technology and additional peer -reviewed literature 
establishing the analytical validity, clinical validity, and clinical utility  of such testing will be 
further required.  
 Analytical Validity  
 Variables that can influence the wheal size when performing skin prick tests (SPT) include multiple 
operators, extract concentrations and quality, skin test devices, time of day, location on the skin, and the measuring of results (Nelson, 2001; Werther et al., 2012).  
 
In 2006, Oppenheimer and Nelson evaluated variability and analytical validity of skin testing. A 
questionnaire was sent to all physician and fellow members of the American College of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology who were currently practicing in the United States. The objective of this 
questionnaire was to determine the diversity of skin testing practices among allergists. The results 
showed great variability among physicians. In particular, “The average number of skin prick tests performed ranged from 5.09 (grasses) to 10.9 (trees), whereas the average number of intradermal 
tests performed ranged from 2.03 (grasses) to 5.6 (perennial). The allergen extract concentrations 
used for intradermal testing varied widely. Expressed as a dilution of t he concentrated extracts, 
20.8% use 1:100 dilutions, 10.3% use 1:500 dilutions, and 59.4% use 1:1,000 dilutions. Significant 
variability also occurred regarding devices and the technique with which the devices were used. 
Most clinicians (92.1%) used the most concentrated extract available for skin prick testing. For 
reporting the results of skin testing, 53.8% used a 0 to 4+ scale, and only 28.3% measured 
orthogonal diameters. Of those using a 0 to 4+ scale, two thirds related the results to the size of the  
histamine control (Oppenheimer & Nelson, 2006).” The results from this survey emphasize potential 
areas of improvement for allergists regarding skin test use and data.  
 
The Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) has evaluated the analytical validity of 
serum IgE measurements and found that “Clinical/diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of IgE 
antibody assays cannot be accurately determined due to the absence of definitive gold standard 
methods for defining allergic disease. Total and allergen -specific IgE analyses achieve among the 
highest analytical performance of any antibody assay by following consensus procedures in CLSI -
ILA20 -A3” (Hamilton et al., 2015).  Page 7 of 26  
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
 
Knight et al. (2018) “examined the qualitative concordance between SPT and sIgE as m easured on 
the HYTEC™288 platform for 10 commonly encountered inhalant allergens”; a total of 232 subjects 
were included. Overall concordance between SPT and sIgE was >70% for all allergens tested. 
Sensitivity ranged from 25% to 95% depending on the allergen, while specificity was significantly 
higher for all allergens (78- 97%). Negative predictive value (NPV) was >85% for all allergens 
tested, while PPV was more variable, ranging from 22% to 88%. The authors noted that “these 
results are similar to finding s in other studies comparing SPT with sIgE” (Knight et al., 2018).  
 
Carlsson et al. (2015) examined the inter - and intra - variability of IgE and IgE receptor expression 
in the blood of seasonal allergic rhinitis (SAR) subjects. Thirty- two patients with SAR  were 
included; the high- affinity IgE receptor, also known as FcεRI, and the low affinity receptor, also 
known as CD23, were measured. The authors found that “FcεRI expression on basophils and CD23 
expression on B cells showed low intrasubject variability both in and out of the pollen season,” 
although there was a small seasonal difference with lower total IgE levels and FcεRI expression 
during the pollen season (Carlsson et al., 2015).  
 
Siroux et al. (2017) explored the effect of allergen nature, route of exposure, and dose of exposure 
on IgE and IgG responses. A total of 340 patients (170 with asthma, 170 without) were included, 
and IgE/IgG responses to 47 inhalant and food allergens were analyzed and compared between 5 French regions according to route of  allergen exposure (inhaled or food). “Ubiquitous” allergens 
(grass, olive/ash pollen, house dust mites) did not show marked difference in specific IgE level between regions. For region- specific allergens (ragweed, birch, cypress), IgE sensitization was 
associated with regional pollen exposure. Airborne allergens cross -reacting with food allergens led 
to frequent IgG recognition. The authors concluded that “the variability in allergen- specific IgE and 
IgG frequencies depends on exposure, route of exposure, and overall immunogenicity of the 
allergen. Allergen contact by the oral route might preferentially induce IgG responses” (Siroux et al., 2017).  
 Sookrung et al. (2019) measured the agreement of a SPT and serum specific IgE test to Periplaneta 
americana (A merican cockroach, ACR) allergies. ACR -extract was used, and sera was obtained 
from 66 individuals clinically diagnosed with chronic allergic rhinitis. Of the 66 samples, 46 were 
positive and 20 negative after a SPT to ACR -extract. Serum IgE levels were th en measured by a 
commercial test kit. The authors note that of the SPT positive cases to ACR -extract, only 32.6% 
were also positive for serum IgE, indicating low concordance between the two testing methods 
(Sookrung et al., 2019).  
 
He and Reisacher (2019) measured the sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value of oral mucosal 
brush biopsies (MBB) as a new diagnostic test for peanut allergies. Twenty individuals participated in this study; each participant underwent oral MBB and serum testing for peanut IgE. The authors 
note that “At 0.12 kU/L, the sensitivity of oral MBB testing was 80% and the specificity was 85%, 
whereas at 1.0 kU/L, the sensitivity of sIgE testing was 50% and the specificity was 100%. From the 
ROC curves, the areas under the ROC curve  (AUC) for oral MBB and sIgE were 0.91 (p < 0.001) 
and 0.74 (p = 0.007), respectively. Combination testing further increased both sensitivity and 
accuracy over oral MBB alone” (He & Reisacher, 2019). These results are promising for oral MBB, 
although more research needs to be completed.  
 Clinical Validity and Utility  
 
In 1998, Tschopp et al. (1998) compared three diagnostic tests for atopic diseases. Total serum IgE, 
Phadiatop, and the SPT were compared for 8329 individuals. Current allergic asthma (CAA) and 
current allergic rhinitis (CAR) were the conditions studied. The prevalence of CAA was 1.8% and 
prevalence for CAR was 16.3%. The prevalence of positive tests was 29%, 23%, and 23% for 
Phadiatop, SPT, and IgE, respectively. The results were as follows: “ To diagnose current allergic 
asthma (CAA) and current allergic rhinitis (CAR), the sensitivity of Phadiatop was significantly 
higher than that of SPT (72.5% vs 65.4%, 77.1% vs 68.4% respectively) and IgE (72.5% vs 56.9%, Page 8 of 26  
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
77.1% vs 43.9%, respectively. The s ensitivity of SPT was significantly higher (68.4% vs 43.9%) 
than that of IgE to diagnose CAR. When CAA and CAR were excluded, the SPT specificity was 
significantly higher than that of Phadiatop (77.8% vs 71.9% and 85.9% vs 80.5%, respectively): 
when CAR wa s excluded, SPT was significantly higher than IgE (85.9 vs 81.4%). SPT had 
significantly the best positive predictive value for CAA (5.2% for SPT vs 4.6% for both IgE and 
Phadiatop) and CAR (48.7% for SPT vs 43.5% for Phadiatop and 31.6% for IgE). The thre e markers 
of atopy had roughly the same negative predictive value (NPV) for CAA, but IgE had a significantly 
lower NPV for CAR than SPT and Phadiatop (88.1% vs 93.3% and 94.7%, respectively). The 
diagnostic efficiency of SPT was significantly higher than t hat of Phadiatop (83.1% vs 79.9% and 
77.6 vs 71.9%, respectively) to diagnose CAR and CAA. IgE and SPT had equal efficiency (77.6%), which was significantly higher than that of Phadiatop, to diagnose CAA (71.9%) (Tschopp et al., 
1998).” The authors concluded that “SPT have the best positive predictive value and the best 
efficiency to diagnose respiratory atopic diseases. Furthermore, SPT give information on sensitivity 
to individual allergens and should therefore be used primarily by clinicians to assess re spiratory 
allergic diseases” (Tschopp et al., 1998).  
 
Usmani and Wilkinson (2007) performed a retrospective analysis of patients who had been prick 
tested to “establish whether an incomplete diagnosis would have been reached if patch testing had 
been omitted.” The authors observed that if “investigation of al lergic skin disease is undertaken by a 
non‐dermatologist, it is unlikely that patch testing will be performed.” A total of 330 patients had 
been prick tested in the time period specified. Sixty- eight patients had positive reactions on prick 
testing, and 36 of those had positive patch tests. Of the 262 patients who had negative prick tests, 121 had positive patch tests (46.1%) of current relevance to patient history in 92 subjects (35.1%). 
The authors concluded that “omission of patch testing from the invest igation of allergic skin 
disease, even when contact urticaria may be the sole suspected diagnosis, would result in the frequent missed diagnosis of contact allergy” (Usmani & Wilkinson, 2007).  
 
In 2014, a meta -analysis examined the clinical validity of SPT  and IgE measurement for food 
allergy. Twenty- four studies consisting of 2831 participants were included. The results were as 
follows: “For cows' milk allergy, the pooled sensitivities were 88% (SPT), and 87% (IgE) and 
specificities were 68% and 48%. For e gg, pooled sensitivities were 92% and 93% and specificities 
were 58% and 49% for SPT and specific -IgE. For wheat, pooled sensitivities were 73% and 83% 
and specificities were 73% and 43% for SPT and sIgE. For soy, pooled sensitivities were 55% and 
83% and specificities were 68% and 38% for SPT and sIgE. For peanut, pooled sensitivities were 
95% and 96%, and specificities were 61% and 59% for SPT and sIgE (Soares -Weiser et al., 2014).”  
 Klemans et al. (2015) examined the diagnostic accuracy of using sIgE to peanut components to 
improve sensitivity and specificity of peanut allergen testing. Twenty- two studies were included. 
The authors found that “sIgE to Ara h 2 [a peanut component] showed the best diagnostic accuracy of all diagnostic tests to diagnose pea nut allergy. Compared to the currently used SPT and sIgE to 
peanut extract, sIgE to Ara h 2 was superior in diagnosing peanut allergy” (Klemans et al., 2015). The authors also found that the worst accuracy was observed to be sIgE to Ara8 and Ara9. The 
authors concluded that “sIgE to Ara 2 should replace SPT and sIgE to peanut extract in daily clinical 
practice” (Klemans et al., 2015).  
 Caglayan Sozmen  et al. (2015) examined the diagnostic accuracy of using the patch test to avoid 
oral food challenge (OFC). They found that in 243 children that underwent OFC to suspected food, clinically relevant food allergies were seen in 40 (65%) children to egg and i n 22 (35%) to cow's 
milk. The sensitivity of SPT for both milk and egg were 92%, specificity 91%, PPV 35%, and NPV 
93%. Sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV of atopy patch test for both milk and egg were 21%, 
73%, 20%, and 74%, respectively.  
 
Santos et a l. (2014) studied the performance of basophil activation tests (BAT) as a diagnostic 
marker for peanut allergy. Forty- three peanut -allergic children, 36 peanut -sensitized but tolerant 
children, and 25 non– peanut -sensitized nonallergic children underwent SP T, sIgE, and BAT. The 
authors found that BAT in peanut -allergic children showed a peanut dose -dependent upregulation of Page 9 of 26  
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
CD63 and CD203c while there was no significant response in the other two cohorts. BAT optimal 
diagnostic cutoffs showed 97% accuracy, 95% PPV, and 98% NPV. BAT allowed reduction of 
required oral food challenges (OFCs) by two- thirds. BAT proved particularly useful in cases in 
which specialists could not accurately diagnose peanut allergy with SPT and sIgE to peanut and to Arah2. Using a 2- step diagnostic approach in which BAT was performed only after equivocal SPT 
or Arah2 -sIgE, BAT had a major effect (97% reduction) on the number of OFCs required. 
 
Santos et al. (2015) also studied the utility of BAT to predict the severity and reactivity t o peanut 
during OFCs. They found that “Of the 124 children submitted to OFCs to peanut, 52 reacted with 
clinical symptoms that ranged from mild oral symptoms to anaphylaxis. Severe reactions occurred in 
41% of cases, and 57% reacted to 0.1 g or less of pea nut protein. The ratio of the percentage of 
CD63(+) basophils after stimulation with peanut and after stimulation with anti -IgE (CD63 
peanut/anti -IgE) was independently associated with severity, whereas the basophil allergen 
threshold sensitivity CD -sens ( 1/EC₅₀ × 100, where EC₅₀ = half maximal effective concentration) 
value was independently associated with the threshold of allergic reactions to peanut during OFCs. Patients with CD63 peanut/anti -IgE levels of 1.3 or greater had an increased risk of severe reactions 
(relative risk, 3.4). Patients with a CD -sens value of 84 or greater had an increased risk of reacting 
to 0.1 g or less of peanut protein (relative risk, 1.9) (Santos et al., 2015).” The authors concluded 
that “Basophil reactivity is associated w ith severity, and basophil sensitivity is associated with the 
threshold of allergic reactions to peanut. CD63 peanut/anti -IgE and CD -sens values can be used to 
estimate the severity and threshold of allergic reactions during OFCs” (Santos et al., 2015).  
 
Davila et al. (2015) explored the association between total IgE and severity of asthma. A total of 
383 patients were included (129 mild, 82 moderate, and 172 severe). Serum IgE levels were noted to 
vary “markedly” (147% coefficient of variation). The author s did not find an association between 
total IgE and forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) or asthma severity; although, the severe subgroup had a higher percentage of patients with >400 IU/mL. Independent predictors of higher 
IgE were found to be younger age, sensitization to ≥ 2 allergens, male gender, and family history of 
asthma. The authors concluded that “we did not find a significant association between serum total 
IgE levels and asthma severity or airflow limitation, except for a higher percent age of patients with 
IgE > 400 IU/mL in the severe subgroup” (Davila et al., 2015).  
 
Tannert et al. (2017) investigated the relevance of a positive skin test and positive IgE test to 
penicillin allergy. Twenty- five patients with positive results were given  penicillin, and another 19 
patients deemed allergic were included. However, only 9 of the 25 patients given penicillin were challenge positive. Positive results from each test alone did not predict allergy. The authors 
concluded that “the best predictor f or a clinically significant (IgE -mediated) penicillin allergy is a 
combination of a positive case history with simultaneous positive ST result and s -IgE or a positive 
challenge result” (Tannert et al., 2017).  
 
Suárez- Fariñas et al. (2021) investigated the validity of the peanut BBEA diagnostic test on 133 
subjects as well as on 82 additional subjects from another study, forming a cohort for a paper titled, 
“Accurate and reproducible diagnosis of peanut allergy using epitope mapping.” The authors 
measured levels of IgE to epitopes evaluated against a threshold established prior to the study. The peanut BBEA diagnostic test diagnosed 93% of subjects accurately, with a sensitivity threshold of 
92% and specificity of 94%. The positive predictive value (PPV) was 91%. The authors concluded 
that “the overall accuracy was found to be superior to existing diagnostic tests for peanut allergy 
including skin prick testing, peanut sIgE, and peanut component sIgE testing” (Suárez -Fariñas et al., 
2021).  
 
Guidelines and Reco mmendations  
 
The American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (AAAAI) and the American 
College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (ACAAI)  Page 10  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
 
The AAAI and ACAAI published practice parameters in 2008 for allergy testing (Bernstein et al., 
2008) which noted that “For individual patients, the choice of test allergens is guided by the history 
and physical examination and the physician’s knowledge, t raining, and experience.” The guidelines 
recommended that “Specific IgE immunoassays may be preferable to skin testing under special 
clinical conditions, such as widespread skin disease, patients receiving skin test suppressive therapy, 
uncooperative patie nts, or when the history suggests an unusually greater risk of anaphylaxis from 
skin testing.” They also note that for both skin testing and in- vitro specific IgE testing, “the 
allergens selected … should be determined based on the patient’s age, history, environment and 
living conditions (e.g., region of the country), occupation, and activities.” Also, “The best indicators 
in the selection of appropriate pollens for clinical use are extensive prevalence in the air and 
concurrent allergy symptoms during ann ually recurrent seasons when such pollens are expected to 
be present in the ambient air.”  
 
They AAAAI and ACAAI guidelines also state, “As is the case with skin tests, a direct correlation 
cannot be assumed between the presence of specific IgE (sIgE) anti bodies and clinical disease.” 
Additionally, “sensitivity and the positive predictive value of both prick/puncture and specific IgE 
tests generally tend to be higher among pollens, stable anaphylactogenic foods, house dust mite, 
certain epidermals, and fung i compared with venoms, drugs, and chemicals.”  
 
With regards to total IgE testing, these groups indicate, “Measurements of total serum IgE 
concentration are of modest clinical value when used as a screen for allergic disease or for 
predicting the risk of a llergic disease.”  
 The AAAAI and ACAAI also note that “IgG and IgG subclass antibody tests for food allergy do not 
have clinical relevance, are not validated, lack sufficient quality control, and should not be 
performed.”  
 Regarding basophil activation assays they state, “Histamine and leukotriene release measurements 
from human basophils after incubation with allergen are valuable research tools for in vitro 
investigations of allergy (Bernstein et al., 2008).”  
 
Their practice parameter on dru g allergy also states that “The basophil activation test is a recently 
described method of evaluating expression of CD63 on basophils after stimulation with an allergen. There are limited data using this method to evaluate patients with possible allergies to β -lactam 
antibiotics and nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)” (Boyce et al., 2010). 
 
They also recommend, “Because anaphylactic reactions cannot be distinguished from anaphylactoid, 
nonimmune occurrences, it has been recommended that plasma hi stamine, tryptase, and specific 
IgEs (if available) may be ordered at the time of reaction and skin tests be performed later” (Boyce 
et al., 2010).  
 
In their 2014 practice parameter on food allergy (Sampson et al., 2014) they acknowledge: 
“Basophil and eos inophilic reactivity tests have been shown to be associated with food- induced 
allergic responses and have been shown in current research to be modified over time during 
immunotherapy.”  
 Their 2014 practice parameter on rhinosinusitis also recommends to “Pe rform an evaluation for 
specific IgE antibodies to airborne allergens in patients with RARS or CRS.” An updated practice 
parameter on rhinitis published in 2020 comments that local allergic rhinitis will often be associated 
with “negative skin prick tests (and intradermal tests, when performed) and absence of serum -
specific IgE (sIgE) antibodies but a positive nasal allergen provocation test (NAPT) to aeroallergens 
(Dykewicz et al., 2020). With respect to vasomotor rhinitis, the authors state that “laboratory tests, 
skin prick tests, and sIgE are helpful only to exclude AR [allergic rhinitis].”  
 Page 11  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
In this practice parameter, they also make the following summary concerning re -evaluation of food 
allergies in children and adolescents: “Summary Statement 11: Consi der the natural course of 
allergies to specific foods when deciding on the frequency of food allergy follow -up evaluations, 
recognizing that allergies to certain foods (milk, egg, wheat, and soy) generally resolve more 
quickly in childhood than others (pea nut, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish). These observations could 
support individualized follow -up (ie, roughly yearly re -evaluations of these allergies in childhood) 
with less frequent retesting if results remain particularly high (eg, >20- 50 kUA/L). [Strength of 
recommendation: Moderate; C Evidence].” 
 In their 2015 practice parameter on anaphylaxis (Lieberman et al., 2015), they recommend “Skin 
tests and/or in vitro tests for specific IgE and challenge tests might be appropriate to help define the 
cause of the anaphylaxis.”  
 
They also recommend against routinely obtaining total serum IgE levels for the diagnosis of food 
allergy, however, because of the low PPV of self -reported symptoms and lack of pathognomonic 
signs on physical examination, they recommend t hat the accurate diagnosis of IgE -mediated food 
allergy should be aided by laboratory allergy testing, including skin prick and/or serum IgE testing. 
The clinician should use specific IgE tests (skin prick tests, serum tests, or both) to foods as 
diagnosti c tools; however, testing should be focused on foods suspected of provoking the reaction, 
and test results alone should not be considered diagnostic of food allergy. Moreover, “The diagnosis 
of food- induced anaphylaxis should be based on signs and symptoms  in association with likely or 
known exposure to a food allergen”, as “Events mimicking anaphylaxis also can occur after the ingestion of food” (Lieberman et al., 2015).  
 
In a Choosing Wisely (CW) report, the AAAAI recommends against performing “unproven 
diagnostic tests, such as immunoglobulin G (lgG) testing or an indiscriminate battery of 
immunoglobulin E (lgE) tests, in the evaluation of allergy” (AAAAI, 2012).  
 In another CW report, the AAAAI recommends against routine diagnostic testing in patients wi th 
chronic urticaria, stating that “skin or serum -specific IgE testing for inhalants or foods is not 
indicated, unless there is a clear history implicating an allergen as a provoking or perpetuating 
factor for urticaria” (AAAAI, 2012).  
 
The AAAAI also publ ished a 2020 practice parameter update on peanut allergy diagnosis. The 
authors recommend in favor of diagnostic skin prick test or sIgE testing for peanut allergy in 
patients with physician -judged high pretest probability of peanut allergy. Testing is als o 
recommended prior to an oral food challenge for patients with moderate pretest probability of peanut allergy. Ara h 2 diagnostic testing is the suggested approach for patients presenting for 
evaluation of suspected peanut allergy for which a single diagnostic test is to be used, due to its superior diagnostic accuracy “by virtue of more optimal positive/negative likelihood ratios.” 
However, Ara h 2 is noted to have lower sensitivity than the skin prick or sIgE tests, so a clinician 
may use Ara h 2, SPT, or sIgE to confirm the diagnosis of peanut allergy in a patient with a high 
prior probability. The AAAAI recommends against “routine use of component testing in addition to 
either SPT or sIgE to whole peanut to increase diagnostic accuracy”, and also agains t using the 
results of skin prick or sIgE to determine “the severity of an allergy phenotype or to predict the 
severity of a future reaction.”  
 
It is noteworthy that all the the  recommendations above were assigned “low” or “very low” degrees 
of evidence certainty (Greenhawt et al., 2020).  
 
Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters (JTFPP)  
 
In a practice parameter concerning contact dermatitis, the Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters —
composed of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology (AAAAI), the American 
College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology (ACAAI), and the Joint Council of Allergy, Asthma & 
Immunology —proposed this series of summary statements:  Page 12  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
 
“Summary Statement 1: Consider ACD [allergic contact dermatitis] in the differential diagnosis of 
patients with chronic eczematous or noneczematous dermatitis. [Strength of Recommendation: 
Strong; C Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 2: In patients suspected of ACD, patch testing is the gold standard to confirm 
the diagnosis. [Strength of Recommendation: Strong; C Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 3: In addition to personal products used by a patient suspected of ACD, review 
the home and workplace for other sources of contact allergens. [Strength of Recommendation: 
Moderate; D Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 4: Evaluate patients for both irritant and allergic causes, especially in those 
presenting with hand dermatitis. [Strength of Recommendation: Strong; C Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 5: Allergic CD should be suspected and evaluated in the patient with both 
generalized and anatomically localized skin eruptions (such as the hands, face, eyelids) that come in 
contact with the substances in the environment. [Strength of Re commendation: Moderate; C 
Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 6: In a patient with a facial rash involving the periorbital areas (eg, eyelids), 
evaluate for ACD caused by components of cosmetics, such as fragrances, preservatives, and 
excipients, because these are common sensitizers of the facial skin. [Strength of Recommendation: 
Moderate; C Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 7: Evaluate patients presenting with lip dermatitis (cheilitis) and perioral 
dermatitis for both irritant and allergic causes of contact dermat itis. [Strength of Recommendation: 
Moderate; C Evidence]   
Summary Statement 8: Evaluate patients with chronic oral mucosal inflammatory conditions for 
disorders other than ACD. [Strength of Recommendation: Moderate; C Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 9: In p atients presenting with dermatitis that involves the scalp and neck, 
consider patch testing for common causative sensitizers in cosmetics, hair products, and jewelry. [Strength of Recommendation: Moderate; C Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 10: Consider irrit ant and ACD in all patients presenting with acute or chronic 
hand eczema. All such patients suspected of CD should undergo patch testing. [Strength of Recommendation: Moderate; C Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 11: Evaluate patients with axillary dermatitis for ACD caused by local contact 
sensitivity to allergens in topically applied products found in deodorants and textiles. In some cases, 
axillary dermatitis could be a manifestation of systemic contact dermatitis (SCD) (ie, “the baboon 
syndrome”). [Strength of Recommendation: Moderate; C Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 12: Evaluate patients presenting with anogenital dermatitis for possible ACD to 
antigens contained in topically applied products. [Strength of Recommendation: Moderate; C 
Evidence]  
 
Summary Statement 13: Consider a diagnosis of SCD following systemic exposure (eg, ingestion, 
infusion, or transcutaneous exposure) to a known contact sensitizer in a patient who presents with 
generalized dermatitis, intertriginous and flexural exanthema ( Baboon syndrome), and/or a flare at 
previous cutaneous sites of exposure [Strength of Recommendation: Moderate; C Evidence].  
 Page 13  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
Summary Statement 14: Consider PT to rubber chemicals, adhesives, and leather components of 
footwear in patients presenting with unexplained chronic dermatitis involving the lower extremities, 
feet and/or soles. [Strength of Recommendation: Moderate; C Evi dence]  
 Summary Statement 15: In addition to avoiding irritants in patients with atopic dermatitis (AD), 
evaluate for ACD, if suspected, as the 2 dermatologic conditions often coexist in the same patient. 
[Strength of Recommendation: Moderate; C Evidence] ” (Fonacier et al., 2015).  
 
Consensus based statements (CBSs) regarding the diagnosis and management of rhinitis from the 
JTFPP include the following:  
  
 
(Dykewicz et al., 2020).  
 World Allergy Organization Position Paper  
 In 2020, the World Allergy Organization published a position paper on IgE allergy diagnostics and 
other relevant allergy tests. Key statements from the paper can be found below:  
 
• “Clinical suspicion of allergic sensitization is confirmed by demonstrating the presence of 
allergen -specific IgE antibodies in vivo (skin tests) or in vitro.  
• Confirmation of allergen sensitization and the identification of causal allergens are essential for 
optimizing the management of allergic conditions.  
• Skin prick testing (SPT) is the most frequently used method for the detection of IgE antibodies, due to i ts rapidity, simplicity, and low cost. Skin prick tests and other skin test results must be 
interpreted by a clinician with adequate knowledge of medical history, clinical findings, and 
relevant type I allergens (including environmental, food, animal, inse ct, fungal, and drug 
allergens). Skin tests should include the relevant allergens in the given geographical area and ideally carried out only using standardized allergenic extracts.  
• In vitro tests, including molecular based allergy diagnostics, using eit her in single -plex and in 
multi -plexed strategies and other more functional tests, such as Basophil Activation Tests allow 
to better define the IgE profile of the patient. This approach is in line with the Precision 
Medicine statements” (I. J. Ansotegui et  al., 2020)  
 
The paper also states that “Skin tests, especially SPT, represent the most reliable and cost -effective 
tool for the diagnosis and management of IgE -mediated diseases. They demonstrate a good 
correlation with outcomes of nasal, conjunctival, de rmal, oral and bronchial challenges” (I. J. 
Ansotegui et al., 2020).  
 Clinical conditions where SPT is indicated include:  
• “Asthma;  
• Rhinitis/rhinosinusitis/rhino -conjunctivitis/conjunctivitis;  
• Eczema/atopic dermatitis (in the setting of selectively high clinical suspicion for underlying 
presence of IgE hypersensitivity to specific allergens);  
Page 14  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
• Suspected food allergy (oral allergy syndrome, anaphylaxis/acute onset or exacerbation of 
urticaria or  eczema that is temporally correlated with food ingestion);  
• Suspected drug allergy;  
• Hymenoptera venom allergy (systemic reactions immediately following insect sting);  
• Suspected occupational disease or exposure to selected potential allergens;  
• Chronic urticaria in rare selected cases which strongly suggest an allergen as potential trigger/ 
aggravating factor;  
• Less common disorders, such as eosinophilic esophagitis, eosinophilic gastroenteritis or allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, where IgE sensitization is one of the characteristics of its 
pathogenesis. However, there is controversy regarding the utility of SPT for these illnesses” (I. 
J. Ansotegui et al., 2020)  
 
“SPT is not routinely indicated in the following instances in the absence of other existing features of 
allergic disease:  
• Suspected food intolerance (e.g., irritable bowel syndrome, etc.);  
• Chronic urticaria in the absence of allergic features in the history;  
• Desire to lose weight (according to nonconventional approaches, obesity may be due to food 
intolerance, but no supporting scientific data have been reported in the literature);  
• Non-specific food -associated symptoms to food additives/preservatives/colorants;  
• Evaluation of the effectiveness of allergen immunotherapy (but may be supportive in 
Hymenoptera venom immunotherapy);  
• Non-specific respiratory symptoms to irritants (i.e., smoke, perfumes, detergents, chemicals and 
other strong odors);  
• Screening for allergic sensitization patterns in the absence of clinical sym ptoms (i.e., family 
history of allergy);  
• Non-specific cutaneous rashes in the absence of atopic features or other allergic symptoms; 
migraine, except for the indication of specific hypersensitivity to hormones. However, strong scientific data are still m issing.  
• Chronic fatigue syndrome” (I. J. Ansotegui et al., 2020)  
 
In a 2020 publication on anaphylaxis guidance, the WAO confirms that “allergy testing should be 
based on patient history and local data regarding the common causes of anaphylaxis in the region. The most frequent elicitor groups worldwide are food, insect venom, and drugs” (Cardona et al., 
2020).  
 
World Allergy Organization (WAO), Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA), and 
the Global Allergy and Asthma Europe an Network (GA2LEN)  
 The WAO, ARIA, and GA2LEN published a consensus document in 2020 focused on molecular -
based allergy diagnoses. Precision allergy molecular diagnostic applications (PAMD@) “can 
increase the accuracy of an allergy diagnosis in certain ci rcumstances. In allergic patients, a 
molecular approach is suitable for the following:  
 
• Assessing the risk of potential allergic reactions, which depend on the individual allergic 
(clinical) sensitization profile;  
• Evaluating whether unknown potential triggering factors are present (i.e., the presence of sIgE versus allergenic molecules corr elated with high risk for allergic reactions)” (Ignacio J. 
Ansotegui et al., 2020).  
 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)  
 
The NIAID convened an expert panel to review current information and to make recommendations related to the evaluation of food allergy (FA), including the use of specific IgE (sIgE) testing 
(Boyce et al., 2010). With regards to allergen- specific serum IgE determination, NIAID 
recommended that “sIgE tests for identifying foods that potentially provoke IgE -mediate d food-
induced allergic reactions, but alone these tests are not diagnostic of FA.” It stated that “sIgE testing Page 15  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
and skin prick testing both depend on the presence of allergen -specific antibodies. Because the 
former test measures sIgE in the serum and the latter reflects IgE bound to cutaneous mast cells, 
their results may not always correlate. Serum testing can be especially useful when SPTs cannot be 
done (for example, due to extensive dermatitis or dermatographism), or when antihistamines cannot 
be disco ntinued.” The NIAID also recommended not using the combination of skin prick test (SPT), 
sIgE tests and atopy patch test (ATP) for the routine diagnosis of food allergy.  
 
Additionally, the NIAID notes that “the routine use of measuring total serum IgE shou ld not be used 
to make a diagnosis of FA.”  
 
“Non -standardized tests” such as basophil histamine release/activation, lymphocyte stimulation, 
allergen -specific IgG, cytotoxicity assays, and mediator release assays should not be used in the 
routine evaluation of FA, according to the NIAID guidelines (Boyce et al., 2010).  
 
In 2017, the NIAID published addendum guidelines for the prevention of peanut allergy in the 
United States. These guidelines note that the expert panel (EP) “recommends that evaluation with 
peanut -specific IgE (peanut sIgE) measurement, SPTs, or both be st rongly considered before 
introduction of peanut to determine if peanut should be introduced and, if so, the preferred method of introduction. To minimize a delay in peanut introduction for children who may test negative, 
testing for peanut sIgE may be the preferred initial approach in certain health care settings, such as family medicine, pediatrics, or dermatology practices, in which skin prick testing is not routine” 
(Togias et al., 2017). Further, “The EP does not recommend food allergen panel testing or  the 
addition of sIgE testing for foods other than peanut because of their poor positive predictive value, 
which could lead to misinterpretation, overdiagnosis of food allergy, and unnecessary dietary 
restrictions” (Togias et al., 2017). More, if an infant  has severe eczema, an egg allergy, or both, the 
EP recommends to “Strongly consider evaluation by sIgE measurement and/or SPT and, if necessary, an OFC. Based on test results, introduce peanut -containing foods” (Togias et al., 2017).  
 
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)  
 In 2012, AAP released a clinical report on allergy testing in childhood. It stated that “Both serum 
sIgE  tests and SPT are sensitive and have similar diagnostic properties.” The AAP summary 
included the following:  
 
• “Treatment decisions for infants and children with allergy should be made on the basis of 
history and, when appropriate, identified through dir ected serum sIgE or SPT testing. Newer in 
vitro sIgE tests have supplanted radioallergosorbent tests.”  
• “Positive sIgE test results indicate sensitization but are not equivalent to clinical allergy. Large 
panels of indiscriminately performed screening tes ts may, therefore, provide misleading 
information.”  
• “Increasingly higher levels of sIgE (higher concentrations on serum tests or SPT wheal size) 
generally correlate with an increased risk of clinical allergy.” 
• “Use of a multiallergen serum test can be helpful for screening for atopic disease if there is a clinical suspicion. If positive, allergen- specific testing may be considered.  
• “Tests for allergen -specific IgG antibodies are not helpful for diagnosing allergies (AAP, 
2012).”  
 
In 2019, the AAP publ ished new guidelines on the prevention of childhood food allergies and other 
allergic conditions. This article states that “The new recommendations for the prevention of peanut 
allergy are based largely on the LEAP trial and are endorsed by the AAP.” The A AP endorsed 
guidelines were published by Togias et al. (2017) and are noted above. They state that the highest -
risk infants (those with severe eczema and/or egg allergies) should be introduced to peanuts by 4- 6 
months; further, allergy testing is strongly advised before peanut introduction. SPT and blood 
testing for peanut -specific IgE (sIgE) are allowable (Greer et al., 2019; Sicherer, 2017).  
 Page 16  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
In 2020, the AAP published a state -of-the-art review of peanut allergy testing advances and 
controversies. The art icle states that “current first -line diagnostic tests for peanut allergy have 
limited specificity, which may be enhanced with emerging tools such as component -resolved 
diagnostics.” Like the 2019 guideline, they note that first -line best practices for pean ut allergy 
testing include SPT or serum peanut -specific IgE measurement. While both tests are highly 
sensitive, neither correlate strongly with reaction severity, according to the AAP (Abrams et al., 
2020).  
 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on Xolai r 
 The availability of Xolair for treatment of allergic asthma also has implications for allergy testing.  
According to the package insert, Xolair is indicated for patients 6 years of age and older with 
moderate to severe persistent asthma who have a positive skin test or in vitro reactivity to a 
perennial aeroallergen and whose symptoms are inadequately controlled with inhaled 
corticosteroids… Determine dose (mg) and dosing frequency by serum total IgE level (IU/mL) 
measured before the start of treatment, and  by body weight (kg).” The prescribing information also 
notes that “Total IgE levels are elevated during treatment and remain elevated for up to one year 
after the discontinuation of treatment. Therefore, re -testing of IgE levels during Xolair treatment 
cannot be used as a guide for dose determination” (FDA, 2016) . 
 
International Consensus Statement on Allergy and Rhinology: Allergic Rhinitis  
 The authors  reviewed the existing evidence behind various aspects of evaluation and diagnosis of 
the AR patient, and developed the following recommendations (Wise et al., 2018) : 
 
• “History taking is essential in the diagnosis of AR. Physical examination is 
recommended in the diagnosis of AR, and when combined with patient history, it increases diagnostic accuracy and excludes alternative causes. Making a presumptive 
diagnosis of AR on history (ideally combined with physical examination) is reasonable 
and would not delay treatment initiation. Confirmation with diagnostic testing is 
required for progression to AIT, or desirable with inadequate response to initial 
treatment.”  
• “Skin‐prick testing (SPT) is recommended for evaluation of alle rgen sensitivities in 
appropriately selected patients. Regular use of the same SPT device will allow clinicians to familiarize themselves with it and interpretation of results may therefore 
be more consistent. The use of standardized allergen extracts can further improve 
consistency of interpretation. Patients can benefit from identification of their specific 
sensitivities. SPT is a quick and relatively comfortable way to test several antigens with 
accuracy similar to other available methods of testing.”  
• “Total IgE assessment is an option to assess atopic status. However, the evidence does 
not support a routine use.”  
• “Serum sIgE testing may be used in the evaluation of AR. Using standardized allergens 
and rigorous proficiency testing on the part of laborator ies may improve accuracy. 
Patients can benefit from identification of their specific sensitivities. Further, in some 
patients who cannot undergo skin testing, sIgE testing is a safe and effective 
alternative.”  
• “The average pooled sensitivity of SPT is 85% which is often slightly higher than that of serum sIgE testing; however, this is not universally true depending on the allergen 
tested and the characteristics of the patient. Based on accuracy, convenience, cost, and promptness of results, SPT is often chosen as the first line diagnostic instrument to 
detect sensitivity to aeroallergens. Intradermal testing can be used as a second line test 
to exclude reactivity if the clinical suspicion is very high. In cases where 
dermatographism is present and/or patient s are unable to wean off medications that 
affect skin testing, sIgE testing may be a better choice.”  Page 17  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
• “BAT is an option for AR diagnosis when first‐line tests are inconclusive or for 
measuring response to AIT. Basophil sensitivity may be a useful marker for  following 
response to immunotherapy.”  
• “Skin testing is not appropriate in all patients. Absolute or relative contraindications to 
SPT include uncontrolled or severe asthma, severe or unstable cardiovascular disease, 
concurrent beta‐blocker therapy, and pr egnancy. Certain medications and skin 
conditions may interfere with skin testing.”  
• The list of medications that may interfere with skin testing are as follows: H1, H2, or 
topical antihistamines, anti‐IgE (omalizumab), leukotriene receptor antagonists, 
tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 
benzodiazepines, topical (cutaneous) or systemic corticosteroids, and topical calcineurin inhibitors (i.e. tacrolimus, picrolimus).  
• The guideline states that because of the “lack of p ublished studies on this topic, an 
Aggregate Grade of Evidence and evidence based recommendation cannot be 
provided.” However, they mention dermatitis and dermatographism as two skin 
conditions that may interfere with skin testing. (Wise et al., 2018)  
 The National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine  
 
The National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine convened an expert committee to 
review the science and management practices of food allergy. Overall, they found that:  
 
• “Currently, no simple diagnostic tests exist for food allergy.”  
• “Food allergy evaluation procedures include a medical history and physical 
examination, and also may include food- specific skin prick test, food- specific serum 
immunoglobulin E test, diagnosti c food elimination diet, and oral food challenge 
(OFC). Selection of the specific tests needs to be individualized based on the medical 
history of each patient.”  
• “The BAT shows promising preliminary data, the potential utility is recognized and will requir e additional validation and standardization.  “Guidelines suggest not using 
the BAT clinically on the grounds that it is nonstandardized, but recognize its use as a 
research tool (NASEM, 2016) .” 
 In 2017, the National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine convened an expert 
committe e to examine critical issues related to food allergy. Regarding diagnosis and prognosis, the 
committee notes that “physicians [should] use evidence -based, standardized procedures as the basis 
for food allergy diagnosis and avoid nonstandardized and unprove n procedures….When food allergy 
is suspected, the patient should be evaluated by a physician who has the training and experience to 
select and interpret appropriate diagnostic tests” (Sicherer et al., 2017) . 
 
American Academ y of Family Physicians (AAFP)  
 
AAFP’s recommendations for practice state: “Allergy and immunologic testing can help clarify the 
diagnosis and guide treatment. Immediate immunoglobulin E (IgE) and delayed T cell –mediated 
reactions are the main types of all ergic responses. The allergens suspected in an immediate IgE -
mediated response are identified through serum IgE -specific antibody or skin testing. For patients 
with an inhalant allergy, skin or IgE -specific antibody testing is preferred. In patients with f ood 
allergies, eliminating the suspected allergenic food from the diet is the initial treatment. If this is 
ineffective, IgE -specific antibody or skin testing can exclude allergens. An oral food challenge 
should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. Patie nts with an anaphylactic reaction to an insect 
sting should undergo IgE -specific antibody or skin testing. Skin testing for penicillin has a high 
negative predictive value and can help when penicillin administration is indicated and there are 
limited alter natives. Testing for other drug allergies has less well -determined sensitivity and 
specificity but can guide the diagnosis. Patch testing can help identify the allergen responsible for 
contact dermatitis (K. L. Chang & J. C. Guarderas, 2018) .” Page 18  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
 
European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (EAACI)  
 
The EAACI published guidelines on “Biomarkers for monitoring the clinical efficacy of allergen 
Immunotherapy (AIT).” In it, they concluded that “to date, there are no validated and generally 
accepted candidate biomarkers that are predictive or indicative of the clinical response to AIT.” 
However, they did note sIgE/tIgE ratio and IgE‐FAB as candidate biomarkers for future research 
(Shamji et al., 2017) . 
 
The EAACI released a po sition statement on the BAT. In it, they concluded that “Basophil 
activation test has been established as a routine diagnostic test with standardized allergen 
preparations in a number of service laboratories… An important next step is the standardization a nd 
automation of analysis of BAT. Once that is achieved, it will be possible to do large multicenter 
trials to characterize the diagnostic performance of BAT and broaden its use as a clinical tool 
(Hoffmann et al., 2015) .” 
 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)  
 
NICE publishe d a guideline on asthma, recommending against use of serum total or specific IgE for 
diagnosing asthma. Specific IgE or prick tests to aeroallergens should be used to identify triggers to 
asthma after a formal diagnosis has been made (NICE, 2021) . 
 NICE also released a statement on multiplex allergen testing, particularly “ImmunoCAP ISAC” 
Although they acknowledge the test’s promise, they state that there is “insufficient evidence to 
recommend the routine adoption of multiplex allergen testing with ImmunoCAP ISAC 112 to help 
diagnose allergy and predict the risk of an allergic reaction in people with allergy that is difficult to 
diagnose, when used with standard clinical assessment (NICE, 2020) .” 
 Regarding the assessment and diagnosis of food alle rgy in under 19s, NICE published the below 
recommendations:  
 
For food allergies classified as IgE -mediated:  
 
“Based on the results of the allergy -focused clinical history, if IgE -mediated allergy is suspected, 
offer the child or young person a skin prick test and/or blood tests for specific IgE antibodies to the 
suspected foods and likely co- allergens.”  
 
“Tests should only be undertaken by healthcare professionals with the appropr iate competencies to 
select, perform and interpret them.”  
 “Skin prick tests should only be undertaken where there are facilities to deal with an anaphylactic 
reaction.” 
 
“Choose between a skin prick test and a specific IgE antibody blood test based on:  
• the results of the allergy -focused clinical history and  
• whether the test is suitable for, safe for and acceptable to the child or young person (or their parent or carer) and  
• the available competencies of the healthcare professional to undertake the tes t and interpret the 
results.”  
 
“Do not carry out allergy testing without first taking an allergy- focused clinical history. Interpret the 
results of tests in the context of information from the allergy -focused clinical history.”  
“Do not use atopy patch test ing or oral food challenges to diagnose IgE -mediated food allergy in 
primary care or community settings” (NICE, 2011).  
 Page 19  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
State and  Federal Regulations , as applicable  
 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  
 
Many labs have developed specific tests that they must validate and perform in house. These 
laboratory- developed tests (LDTs) are regulated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) 
as high- complexity tests under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988 (CLIA 
’88). LDTs are not approved or cleared by the U. S. Food and Drug Administration; however, FDA 
clearance or approval is not currently required for clinical use.  
 
 
Billing /Coding/Physician Documentation Information  
 This policy may apply to the following codes. Inclusion of a code in this section does not guarantee that it 
will be reimbursed. For further information on reimbursement guidelines, please see Administrative Policies on the Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina web site at www.bcbsnc.com. They are listed in 
the C ategory Search on the Medical Policy search page.  
 
Applicable service codes: 82784, 82785, 82787, 83516, 86001, 86003, 86005, 86008, 88184, 88185, 
0165U, 0178U  
 
BCBSNC may request medical records for determination of medical necessity. When medical records are requested, letters of 
support and/or explanation are often useful, but are not sufficient documentation unless all specific information needed to 
make a med ical necessity determination is included.  
 
Scientific Background and Reference Sources  
 AAAAI. (2012). http://www.choosingwisely.org/clinician -lists/american -academy -allergy -asthma -
immunology- diagnostic -tests -for-allergy -evaluation/   
 
AAP. (2012). Allergy Testing in Childhood: Using Allergen- Specific IgE Tests. 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/51a4/dfa0a84e4dc8b0893529a6197bd9b94bdbfe.pdf   
 Abrams, E. M., Chan, E. S., & Sicherer, S. (2020). Peanut Allergy: New Advances and Ongoing 
Controversies. Pediatrics, 145(5), e20192102. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019- 2102
  
 Adams, P. F., Kirzinger, W. K., & Martinez, M. (2013). Summary health statistics for the U.S. population: National Health Interview Survey, 2012. Vital Health Stat 10(259), 1- 95. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/sr10_259.pdf
  
 
Ansotegui, I. J., Melioli, G., Canonica , G. W., Caraballo, L., Villa, E., Ebisawa, M., Passalacqua, 
G., Savi, E., Ebo, D., Gómez, R. M., Luengo Sánchez, O., Oppenheimer, J. J., Jensen- Jarolim, E., 
Fischer, D. A., Haahtela, T., Antila, M., Bousquet, J. J., Cardona, V., Chiang, W. C., . . . Zuber bier, 
T. (2020). IgE allergy diagnostics and other relevant tests in allergy, a World Allergy Organization 
position paper. World Allergy Organ J, 13(2), 100080. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.waojou.2019.100080   
 Ansotegui, I. J., Melioli, G., Canonica, G. W., Gomez, R. M., Jensen- Jarolim, E., Ebisawa, M., 
Luengo, O., Caraballo, L., Passalacqua, G., Poulsen, L., Savi, E., Zuberbier, T., Villa, E., & Oppenheimer, J. (2020). A WAO -  ARIA - GA(2)LEN conse nsus document on molecular -based 
allergy diagnosis (PAMD@): Update 2020. World Allergy Organ J, 13(2), 100091. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.waojou.2019.100091
  
 
Bahri, R., Custovic, A., Korosec, P.,  Tsoumani, M., Barron, M., Wu, J., Sayers, R., Weimann, A., 
Ruiz -Garcia, M., Patel, N., Robb, A., Shamji, M. H., Fontanella, S., Silar, M., Mills, E., Simpson, Page 20  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
A., Turner, P. J., & Bulfone -Paus, S. (2018). Mast cell activation test in the diagnosis of alle rgic 
disease and anaphylaxis. In J Allergy Clin Immunol (Vol. 142, pp. 485- 496 e416). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2018.01.043   
 
Bernstein, I. L., Li, J. T., Bernstein, D. I., Hamilton, R., Spect or, S. L., Tan, R., Sicherer, S., 
Golden, D. B., Khan, D. A., Nicklas, R. A., Portnoy, J. M., Blessing- Moore, J., Cox, L., Lang, D. 
M., Oppenheimer, J., Randolph, C. C., Schuller, D. E., Tilles, S. A., Wallace, D. V., . . . Weber, R. 
(2008). Allergy diagnostic testing: an updated practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol, 100(3 Suppl 3), S1- 148. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S1081- 1206(10)60305- 5
  
 Beyer, K., & Teuber, S. S. (2005). Food allergy diagnostics: scientific and unproven procedures. 
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol, 5(3), 261- 266. 
https://journals.lww.com/co -
allergy/Abstract/2005/06000/Food_allergy_diagnostics__scientific_and_unproven.12.aspx   
 BioSpace. (2021). AllerGenis Allergy Diagnostic Company to Present Significant Milestones at the 
Biotech Showcase(TM) 2021. 
https://www.biospace.com/article/allergenis -allergy -diagnostic -
company- to-present -significant -milest ones -at-the-biotech -showcase- tm-2021/   
 
Boyce, J. A., Assa'ad, A., Burks, A. W., Jones, S. M., Sampson, H. A., Wood, R. A., Plaut, M., 
Cooper, S. F., Fenton, M. J., Arshad, S. H., Bahna, S. L., Beck, L. A., Byrd- Bredbenner, C., 
Camargo, C. A., Jr., Eichenf ield, L., Furuta, G. T., Hanifin, J. M., Jones, C., Kraft, M., . . . 
Schwaninger, J. M. (2010). Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Food Allergy in the 
United States: Summary of the NIAID -Sponsored Expert Panel Report. J Allergy Clin Immunol, 
126(6), 1105- 1118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2010.10.008   
 
Caglayan Sozmen, S., Povesi Dascola, C., Gioia, E., Mastrorilli, C., Rizzuti, L., & Caffarelli, C. 
(2015). Diagnostic accuracy of patch test in children with food allergy. Pediatr Allergy Immunol, 
26(5), 416- 422. https://doi.org/10.1111/pai.12377   
 Cardona, V., Ansotegui, I. J., Ebisawa, M., El -Gamal, Y., Fernandez Rivas, M., Fineman, S., Geller, 
M., Gonzalez -Estrada, A., Greenberger, P. A., Sanchez Borges, M., Senna, G., Sheikh, A., Tanno, L. 
K., Thong, B. Y., Turner, P. J., & Worm, M. (2020). World allergy organization anaphylaxis guidance 2020. World Allergy Organ J, 13(10), 100472. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.waojou.2020.100472
  
 Carlsson, M., Thorell, L., Sjolander, A., & Larsson- Faria, S. (2015). Variability of total and free IgE 
levels and IgE receptor expression in allergic s ubjects in and out of pollen season. Scand J Immunol, 
81(4), 240- 248. https://doi.org/10.1111/sji.12270
  
 
CellScienceSystems. (2021). Identify food and chemical sensitivities with the Alcat Test. 
https://cellsciencesystems.com/providers/alcat -test/  
 
Chang, K.- L., & Guarderas, J. C. (2018). Allergy Testing: Common Questions and Answers. 
American Family Physician, 98(1), 34- 39. /afp/2018/0701/p34.pdf  
 Chang, K. L., & Guarderas, J. C. (2018). Allergy Testing: Common Questions and Answers. Am 
Fam Physician, 98(1), 34- 39. https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issues/2018/0701/p34.html
  
 
Chow, A. W., Benninger, M. S., Brook, I., Brozek, J. L., Goldstein, E. J., Hicks, L. A., Pankey, G. 
A., Seleznick, M., Volturo, G., Wald, E. R., & File, T. M., Jr. (2012). IDSA clinical practice 
guideline for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis in children and adults. Clin Infect Dis, 54(8), e72- e112. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cir1043   
 
Davila, I., Valero, A., Entrenas, L. M., Valveny, N., & Herraez, L. (2015). Relationship between 
serum total IgE and disease severity in patients with allergic asthma in Spain. J Investig Allergol  
Clin Immunol, 25(2), 120 -127. http://www.jiaci.org/issues/vol25issue2/vol25issue02 -5.htm   Page 21  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
 
Depince- Berger, A. E., Sidi -Yahya, K., Jeraiby, M., & Lambert, C. (2017). Basophil activa tion test: 
Implementation and standardization between systems and between instruments. Cytometry A, 91(3), 
261- 269. https://doi.org/10.1002/cyto.a.23078   
Dykewicz, M. S., Wallace, D. V., Amrol, D. J., Ba roody, F. M., Bernstein, J. A., Craig, T. J., 
Dinakar, C., Ellis, A. K., Finegold, I., Golden, D. B. K., Greenhawt, M. J., Hagan, J. B., Horner, C. 
C., Khan, D. A., Lang, D. M., Larenas -Linnemann, D. E. S., Lieberman, J. A., Meltzer, E. O., 
Oppenheimer, J. J., . . . Steven, G. C. (2020). Rhinitis 2020: A practice parameter update. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol, 146(4), 721- 767. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2020.07.007   
 
FDA. (2016). Xolair Label. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2016/103976s5225lbl.pdf  
 
Fonacier, L., Bernstein, D. I., Pacheco, K., Holness, D. L., Blessing- Moore, J., Khan, D., L ang, D., 
Nicklas, R., Oppenheimer, J., Portnoy, J., Randolph, C., Schuller, D., Spector, S., Tilles, S., & Wallace, D. (2015). Contact dermatitis: a practice parameter -update 2015. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
Pract, 3(3 Suppl), S1- 39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2015.02.009
  
 
Genova. (2021). Allergix® IgG4 Food Antibodies 90 -  Serum. 
https://www.gdx.net/product/allergix- igg4- food- antibodies -90-food- sensitivity -test-serum   
 
Greenhawt, M., Shaker, M., Wang, J., Oppenheimer, J. J., Sicherer, S., Keet, C., Swaggart, K., 
Rank, M., Portnoy, J. M., Bernstein, J., Chu, D. K., Dinakar, C., Golden, D., Horner, C., Lang, D. 
M., Lang, E. S., Khan, D. A., Lieberman, J., Stukus, D., & Wallace, D. (2020). Peanut allergy 
diagnosis: A 2020 practice parameter update, systematic review, and GRADE analysis. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol, 146(6), 1302- 1334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2020.07.031   
 
Greer, F. R., Sicherer, S. H., & Burks, A. W. (2019). The Effects of Early Nutritional Interventions 
on the Development of Atopic Disease in Infants and Children: The Role of Maternal Dietary 
Restriction, Breastfeeding, Hydrolyzed Formulas, and Timing of Introduction of Allergenic 
Complementary Foods. Pediatrics, 143(4). https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019- 0281  
 
Hamilton, R. (2021). Allergen sampling in the environment -  UpToDate (P. S. Creticos & A. 
Feldweg, Eds.)  https://www.uptodate.com/contents/allergen -sampling- in-the-environment   
 
Hamilton, R. G., Matsson, P. N., Hovanec -Burns, D. L., Van Cleve, M., Chan, S., Kober, A., 
Kleine -Tebbe, J. R., Renz, H., Magnusson, C., & Quicho, R. (2015). Analytical Performance 
Characteristics, Quality Assurance and Clinical Utility of I mmunological Assays for Human IgE 
Antibodies of Defined Allergen Specificities.(CLSI -ILA20 -A3). Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, 135(2), AB8. https://www.jacionlin e.org/article/S0091- 6749(14)02742 -0/fulltext   
 
Hammond, C., & Lieberman, J. A. (2018). Unproven Diagnostic Tests for Food Allergy. Immunol 
Allergy Clin North Am, 38(1), 153- 163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iac.2017.09.011   
 
He, Y. T., & Reisacher, W. R. (2019). Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value of oral mucosal 
brush biopsy for the diagnosis of peanut allergy. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol, 9(6), 624- 628. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/alr.22302   
 
Hemmings, O., Kwok, M., McKendry, R., & Santos, A. F. (2018). Basophil Activation Test: Old 
and New Applications in Allergy. Current Allergy and Asthma Reports, 18(12), 77. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11882- 018- 0831- 5  
 
Hoffmann, H. J., Santos, A. F., Mayorga, C., Nopp, A., Eberlein, B., Ferrer, M., Rouzaire, P., Ebo, 
D. G., Sabato, V., Sanz, M. L., Pecaric -Petkovic, T., Patil, S. U., Hausmann, O. V., Shreffler, W. G., 
Korosec, P., & Knol, E. F. (2015). The clinical utility of basophil activation testing in diagnosis and 
monitoring of allergic disease. Allergy, 70(11), 1393 -1405. https://doi.org/10.1111/all.12698   Page 22  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
 
Jackson, K. D., Howie., L. D., Akinbami , L. J., & CDC. (2013). Trends in Allergic Conditions 
Among Children: United States, 1997- 2011. NCHS Data Brief. No 121. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db121.htm   
 
Kim, S.  Y., Kim, J. H., Jang, Y. S., Choi, J. H., Park, S., Hwang, Y. I., Jang, S. H., & Jung, K. S. 
(2016). The Basophil Activation Test Is Safe and Useful for Confirming Drug- Induced Anaphylaxis. 
Allergy Asthma Immunol Res, 8(6), 541- 544. https://doi.org/10.4168/aair.2016.8.6.541   
 
Klemans, R. J., van Os -Medendorp, H., Blankestijn, M., Bruijnzeel -Koomen, C. A., Knol, E. F., & 
Knulst, A. C. (2015). Diagnostic accuracy of specific IgE to components in diagnosing peanut allergy: a systematic review. Clin Exp Allergy, 45(4), 720- 730. https://doi.org/10.1111/cea.12412
  
 
Knight, V., Wolf, M. L., Trikha, A., Curran- Everett, D., Hiserote, M., & Harbeck, R. J. (2018). A 
comparison of specific IgE and skin prick test results to common environmental allergens using the HYTEC™ 288. Journal of Immunological Methods, 462, 9- 12. 
https://doi.org/https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.jim.2018.07.005
  
 
Kowal, K., & DuBuske, L. (2021, 05/03/2021). Overview of in vitro allergy tests. 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/overview -of-in-vitro-allergy -tests  
Kowal, K., & DuBuske, L. (2022, 11/30/2022). Overview of skin testing for allergic disease -  
UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/overview -of-skin- testing -for-allergic -disease   
 
Lieberman, P., Nicklas, R. A., Randolph, C., Oppenheimer, J., Bernstein, D., Ber nstein, J., Ellis, A., 
Golden, D. B., Greenberger, P., Kemp, S., Khan, D., Ledford, D., Lieberman, J., Metcalfe, D., Nowak -Wegrzyn, A., Sicherer, S., Wallace, D., Blessing- Moore, J., Lang, D., . . . Tilles, S. A. 
(2015). Anaphylaxis --a practice parameter u pdate 2015. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol, 115(5), 
341- 384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2015.07.019
  
 
Mowad, C. M. (2006). Patch testing: pitfalls and performance. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol, 
6(5), 340- 344. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.all.0000244794.03239.8e   
 
NASEM. (2016). Finding a Path to Safety in Food Allergy:  Assessment of the Global Burden, 
Causes, Prevention, Management, and Public Policy (Finding a Path to Safety in Food Allergy: 
Assessment of the Global Burden, Causes, Prevention, Management, and Public Policy, Issue. http://dx.doi.org/10.17226/23658
 
 Nelson, H. S. (2001) . Variables in Allergy Skin Testing. Immunology and Allergy Clinics, 21(2), 
281- 290. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889- 8561(05)70206- X
  
 NICE. (2011, February 23, 2011). Food allergy in under 19s: a ssessment and diagnosis. National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg116/chapter/Recommendations# ige-mediated -food -allergy
 
 
NICE. (2020). ImmunoCAP ISAC 112 for multiplex allergen testing. 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/dg24/chapter/1- Recommendations   
 NICE. (2021). Asthma: diagnosis, monitoring and chronic asthma management. 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng80
  
 
Oppenheimer, J., & Nelson, H. S. (2006). Skin testing: a survey of allergists. Ann Allergy Asthma 
Immunol, 96(1), 19- 23. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1081- 1206(10)61034- 4  
 
Pawankar, R., Holgate, S.  T., Canonica, G. W., Lockey, R. F., & Blaiss, M. S. (2013). WAO White 
Book on Allergy | World Allergy Organization. http://www.worldallergy.org/wao- white -book- on-
allergy   Page 23  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
 
Rietschel, R. L. (1997). COMPARISON OF ALLERGIC AND IRRITANT CONTACT 
DERMATITIS. Immunology and Allergy Clinics, 17(3), 359- 364. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-
8561(05)70314- 3  
 
Sampson, H. A., A ceves, S., Bock, S. A., James, J., Jones, S., Lang, D., Nadeau, K., Nowak-
Wegrzyn, A., Oppenheimer, J., Perry, T. T., Randolph, C., Sicherer, S. H., Simon, R. A., Vickery, B. P., Wood, R., Bernstein, D., Blessing- Moore, J., Khan, D., Nicklas, R., . . . Wal lace, D. (2014). 
Food allergy: a practice parameter update- 2014. J Allergy Clin Immunol, 134(5), 1016- 1025.e1043. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2014.05.013
  
 
Santos, A. F., Douiri, A., Becares, N., Wu, S. Y., Stephens, A., Radulovic, S., Chan, S. M., Fox, A. 
T., Du Toit, G., Turcanu, V., & Lack, G. (2014). Basophil activation test discriminates between allergy and tolerance in peanut -sensitized children. J Allergy Clin Immunol, 134(3), 645- 652. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2014.04.039
  
 
Santos, A. F., Du Toit, G., Douiri, A., Radulovic, S., Stephens, A., Turcanu, V., & Lack, G. (2015). 
Distinct parameters of the basophil activation test re flect the severity and threshold of allergic 
reactions to peanut. J Allergy Clin Immunol, 135(1), 179- 186. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2014.09.001   
 
Santos, A. F., & Lack, G. (2016). Basophil ac tivation test: food challenge in a test tube or specialist 
research tool? Clin Transl Allergy, 6, 10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13601- 016- 0098- 7  
 
Santos, A. F., & Shreffler, W. G. (2017). Road map f or the clinical application of the basophil 
activation test in food allergy. Clin Exp Allergy, 47(9), 1115- 1124. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cea.12964   
 
Shamji, M. H., Kappen, J. H., Akdis, M., Jensen- Jarolim, E., Knol, E. F., Kleine -Tebbe, J., Bohle, 
B., Chaker, A. M., Till, S. J., Valenta, R., Poulsen, L. K., Calderon, M. A., Demoly, P., Pfaar, O., Jacobsen, L., Durham, S. R., & Schmidt -Weber, C. B. (2017). Biomarkers for monitoring clinical 
efficacy of allergen immunotherapy for allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and allergic asthma: an EAACI 
Position Paper. Allergy, 72(8), 1156- 1173. https://doi.org/10.1111/all.13138
 
  
Sicherer, S. (2017). New guidelines de tail use of ‘infant -safe’ peanut to prevent allergy. 
https://www.aappublications.org/news/2017/01/05/PeanutAllergy010517  
 Sicherer, S. H., Allen, K., Lack, G., Taylor, S. L ., Donovan, S. M., & Oria, M. (2017). Critical 
Issues in Food Allergy: A National Academies Consensus Report. Pediatrics, 140(2). 
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017- 0194
  
 
Siroux, V., Lupinek, C., Resch, Y., Curin, M., Just, J., Keil, T., Kiss, R., Lodrup Carlsen, K., Melen, 
E., Nadif, R., Pin, I., Skrindo, I., Vrtala, S., Wickman, M., Anto, J. M., Valenta, R., & Bousquet, J. 
(2017). Specific IgE and IgG measured by the MeDALL allergen- chip depend on all ergen and route 
of exposure: The EGEA study. J Allergy Clin Immunol, 139(2), 643- 654.e646. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.05.023   
 
Soares -Weiser, K., Takwoingi, Y., Panesar, S. S., Muraro, A., Werfel, T., Hoffmann -Sommergruber, 
K., Roberts, G., Halken, S., Poulsen, L., van Ree, R., Vlieg- Boerstra, B. J., & Sheikh, A. (2014). 
The diagnosis of food allergy: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Allergy, 69(1), 76- 86. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/all.12333   
 Sookrung, N., Jotikaprasardhna, P., Bunnag, C., Chaicumpa, W., & Tungtrongchitr, A. (2019). 
Concordance of skin prick test and serum -specific IgE to locally produced component -resolved 
diagnostics f or cockroach allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol, 122(1), 93- 98. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2018.09.463   Page 24  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
 
Spiriplex. (2021). Allergies. https://spiriplex.com/allergies/   
 
Stokes, J., & Casale, T. (2022, 11/22/2022). The relationship between IgE and allergic disease. 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the -relationship -between -ige-and-allergic -disease  
 Suárez- Fariñas, M., Suprun, M., Kearney, P., Getts , R., Grishina, G., Hayward, C., Luta, D., Porter, 
A., Witmer, M., du Toit, G., Lack, G., Chinthrajah, R. S., Galli, S. J., Nadeau, K., & Sampson, H. 
A. (2021). Accurate and reproducible diagnosis of peanut allergy using epitope mapping. Allergy, 
n/a(n/a).  https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/all.14905
  
 Tannert, L. K., Mortz, C. G., Skov, P. S., & Bindslev- Jensen, C. (2017). Positive Skin Test or 
Specific IgE to Penicillin Does Not Reliab ly Predict Penicillin Allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
Pract, 5(3), 676- 683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2017.03.014
  
 
Togias, A., Cooper, S. F., Acebal, M. L., Assa'ad, A., Baker, J. R., Jr., Be ck, L. A., Block, J., Byrd-
Bredbenner, C., Chan, E. S., Eichenfield, L. F., Fleischer, D. M., Fuchs, G. J., 3rd, Furuta, G. T., Greenhawt, M. J., Gupta, R. S., Habich, M., Jones, S. M., Keaton, K., Muraro, A., . . . Boyce, J. A. 
(2017). Addendum guidelines  for the prevention of peanut allergy in the United States: Report of the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases -sponsored expert panel. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol, 139(1), 29- 44. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.010
  
 
Tschopp, J. M., Sistek, D., Schindler, C., Leuenberger, P., Perruchoud, A. P., Wuthrich, B., 
Brutsche, M., Zellweger, J. P., Karrer, W., & Brandli, O. (1998). Current allergic asthma and 
rhinitis: diagnostic efficienc y of three commonly used atopic markers (IgE, skin prick tests, and 
Phadiatop). Results from 8329 randomized adults from the SAPALDIA Study. Swiss Study on Air Pollution and Lung Diseases in Adults. Allergy, 53(6), 608- 613. 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9689343/
  
 Usmani, N., & Wilkinson, S. M. (2007). Allergic skin disease: investigation of both immediate - and 
delayed -type hypersensitivity is essential. Clin Exp Allergy, 37(10), 1541- 1546. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 2222.2007.02805.x
  
 
Werther, R. L., Choo, S., Lee, K. J., Poole, D., Allen, K. J., & Tang, M. L. (2012). Variability in 
Skin Prick Test Results Performed by Multiple Op erators Depends on the Device Used. World 
Allergy Organ J, 5(12), 200- 204. https://doi.org/10.1097/WOX.0b013e31827e6513   
 
Wise, S. K., Lin, S. Y., Toskala, E., Orlandi, R. R., Akdis, C. A., Alt, J. A., Azar, A., Baroody, F. 
M., Bachert, C., Canonica, G. W., Chacko, T., Cingi, C., Ciprandi, G., Corey, J., Cox, L. S., Creticos, P. S., Custovic, A., Damask, C., DeConde, A., . . . Zacharek, M. (2018). International 
Consensus Statement on Allergy and R hinology: Allergic Rhinitis. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol, 8(2), 
108- 352. https://doi.org/10.1002/alr.22073
  
 
Wuthrich, B. (2005). Unproven techniques in allergy diagnosis. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol, 
15(2), 86- 90. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16047707/   
 
Zug, K. A., Pham, A. K., Belsito, D. V., De Koven, J. G., DeLeo, V. A., Fowler, J. F., Jr., Fransway, 
A. F., Maibach, H. I., Marks, J. G., Jr., Mathias, C. G., Pratt, M. D., Sasseville, D., Storrs, F. J., Taylor, J. S., Warshaw, E. M., & Zirwas, M. J. (2014). Patch testing in children from 2005 to 2012: 
results from the North American contact dermatitis group. Dermatitis, 25(6), 345- 355. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/der.0000000000000083
  
  
Specialty Matched Consultant Advisory Panel review 11/2019  
 
Medical Director review 11/2019  
 Page 25  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
Specialty Matched Consultant Advisory Panel review 11/2020  
 
Medical Director review 11/2020  
 Specialty Matched Consultant Advisory Panel review 11/2021  
 Medical Director review 11/202 1 
 
Medical Director review 4/202 3 
 
Policy Implementation/Update Information 
 1/1/2019  BCBSNC will provide coverage for allergen testing  when it is determined to be medically 
necessary because the medical criteria and guidelines are met. Medical Director review 
1/1/2019. Policy noticed 1/1/2019 for effective date 4/1/2019.  (jd) 
 
10/1/19  Policy statement revised to read :   BCBSNC will prov ide coverage for allergen testing when it 
is determined the medical criteria or reimbursement guidelines below are met.  Wording 
revised in the Covered Section to change “medically necessary” to “reimbursement is 
allowed.” Wording revised in the Not Covered section. “Not Medically Necessary” and 
“investigational” changed to read “Reimbursement is not allowed…” Deleted coding grid. Notification 10/1/2019 for effective date 12/2/2019.  (an)  
 
12/10/19     Reviewed by Avalon 3
rd Quarter 2019 CAB. Removed “Additional testing beyond this number 
will require individual review for coverage criteria” from the When Covered section. Added “or non- specific IgG, IgA, IgM, and/or IgD” to the When Not Covered section. The following 
codes: 88346, 86352, 86021, and 86434 along with the code table were removed from the 
Billing/Coding section. Specialty Matched Consultant Advisory Panel review 11/2019. 
Medical Director review 11/2019. (jd)  
 11/10/20    Reviewed by Avalon 3
rd Quarter 2020 CAB. Added item #5  under the When Not Covered 
section as follows: “Reimbursement  is not allowed for in- vitro allergen testing using 
bead -based epitope assays such as VeriMAP Peanut Dx and others.” . Policy guidelines 
and references updated, and the following codes were added to the Billing/Coding 
section: 88185, 0165U, 0178U . Medical Director review 10/2020. (jd)  
 12/8/20       Specialty Matched Consultant Advisory Panel review 11/ 2020. Medical Dire ctor review 
11/2020. (jd)  
 
11/16/21    Reviewed by Avalon 3
rd Quarter 2021 CA B. Added item #6 to the When Not Covered 
section as follows: “  Reimbursement  is not allowed for in- vitro testing of allergen non-
specific IgE that does not identify a specific allergen using qualitative multi -allergen 
screen in the evaluation of suspected allergy and for any other indication.”  Policy 
guidelines and references upda ted.  Medical Director review 1 0.2021 (jd)  
 
11/30/21     Specialty Matched Consultant Advisory Panel review 11/ 2021. Medical Director review 
11.2021 (jd)  
 
5/17/22       Off -cycle review by Avalon 1st Quarter 2022 CAB. Description section updated and added 
Related Policies section. Under the When Covered section, removed the following statement 
from item #1 a: “When in vitro testing is ordered, the medical record must clearly document 
the indication and why it is being used instead of skin testing.” , and added item #4.  Under the 
When Not Covered section, added the following statement to the end of item #1: “except as specified in criteria 4 (above). Policy guidelines updated, added table of terminology. 
Removed code 83520 from the Billing/Coding sectio n. Medical Director review 4/2022. (jd)  Page 26  of 26 
An Independent Licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association  
  
 Allergen Testing AHS – G2031  
 
5/31/22      The following reimbursement policy was added to Related Policies section: Maximum 
Units of Service . (jd)  
 
5/16/23        Reviewed by Avalon 1st  Quarter 202 3 CAB.   Description, Policy Guidelines , and                  
References updated. Related Policies section removed. Coverage criteria edited for clarity, no  
change in policy statement. Medical Director review 4/2023. (tm)  
 
Medical policy is not an authorization, certification, explanation of benefits or a contract. Benefits and eligibility are 
determined before medical guidelines and payment guidelines are applied. Benefits are determined by the group contract and 
subscriber certificate that is in e ffect at the time services are rendered. This document is solely provided for informational 
purposes only and is based on research of current medical literature and review of common medical practices in the treatment 
and diagnosis of disease. Medical pract ices and knowledge are constantly changing and BCBSNC reserves the right to review 
and revise its medical policies periodically.  