MEDICAL  POLICY STATEMENT  
Marketplace  
Policy Name & Number  Date Effective  
Applied Behavior Analysis Therapy for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder MP -MM-1329  IN, GA, WV, KY: 11/01/2022 
OH: 12/01/2022  
Policy Type  
MEDICAL  
Medical  Policy Statement prepared by CareSource and its affiliate s are derived from literature based on and supported by clinical 
guidelines, nationally recognized utilization and technology assessment guidelines, other medical management industry 
standards, and published MCO clinical policy guidelines.   Medically neces sary services include, but are not limited to, those 
health care services or supplies that are proper and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of disease, illness, or injury and without which the patient can be expected to suffer prolonged, increased or new morbidity, impairment of function, dysfunction of a body organ or part, or significant pain and discomfort.   These services meet the standards of good medical practice in the local 
area, are the lowest cost alternative, and are not provided mainly for the convenience of the member or provider.   Medically 
necessary services also include those services defined in any Evidence of Coverage documents, Medical Policy Statements, Provider Manuals, Member Handbooks, and/or other policies and procedures.  
Medical Policy Statements prepared by CareSource and its affiliates do not ensure an authorization or payment of services.   Please refer to the plan contract (often referred to as the Evidence of Coverage) for the service(s) referenced in the 
Medical Policy S tatement.   If there is a conflict between the Medical Policy Statement and the plan contract (i.e., Evidence of 
Coverage), then the plan contract (i.e., Evidence of Coverage) will be the controlling document used to make the determination. According to the  rules of Mental Health Parity Addiction Equity Act (MHPAEA), coverage for the diagnosis and treatment of a 
behavioral health disorder will not be subject to any limitations that are less favorable than the limitations that apply to medical 
conditions as c overed under this policy.  
This policy applies to the following Marketplace(s):  
☒Georgia ☒Indiana ☒Kentucky ☒Ohio ☒West Virginia
Table of Contents
A.Subject  ............................................................................................................................... 2  
B.Background  ........................................................................................................................ 2  
C.Definitions  ........................................................................................................................... 2  
D. Policy  .................................................................................................................................. 3  
E.Conditions of Coverage  ...................................................................................................... 7  
F.Related Policies/Rules  ........................................................................................................ 7  
H.References  ......................................................................................................................... 9  
I. State -Specific Information  ................................................................................................... 9  Applied Behavior Analysis Therapy 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder MP-MM -1329  
Effective Date: 11/01/2022  
2 
A.Subj
ect
Applied Behavior Analysis Therapy for Autism Spectrum Disorder
B.Background
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) can vary widely in severity and symptoms, depending
on the developmental level and chronological age of the patient. ASD is often defined by
specific impairments that affect socialization, communication, and stereoty ped
(
repetitive) behavior . Children with autism spectrum disorders have pervasive clinically
significant deficits which are present in early childhood in areas such as intellectual
functioning, language, social communication and interactions, as well as restricted,
repetitive patterns of behavior, interests , and activities.
Ther
e is currently no cure for ASD, nor is there any one single treatment for the disorder.
Individuals with ASD may be managed through a combination of therapies, includi ng
behav
ioral, cognitive, pharmacological, and educational interventions. The goal of
treatment for  members  with ASD is to minimize the severity of ASD symptoms,
maximize learning, facilitate social integration, and improve quality of life for both the
me
mbers  and their families/ caregivers.  ABA services may be provided in centers or at
home. Research supports the equivalent effectiveness at both treatment sites .
C.Definitions
•Autism Spectrum Disorder  (ASD) - A neurological condition as defined in the most
recent edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders of t he
A
merican Psychiatric Association.
•A
pplied Behavior Analysis (ABA)  - A treatment  for ASD.
•Caregiver/Family Training - The goal of caregiver/family training is to maximiz e
t
he child’s outcomes. Caregiver/Family training helps the child generalize their skills
–taking the skills they are learning in the one to one therapy to the community.
Caregiver/Family training sessions focus on providing parents and caregiver withknowledge and skills on behavioral concepts and strategies to maximize a
nd
r
einforce the child’s learning and to support the maintenance and generalization of
the skills and treatments they are teaching. Care giver/family are expected t o
par
ticipate in ABA treatment and if unable to, the provider will assist them i n
ac
quiring skills to participate.
•Standardized diagnostic assessment tools  -
oAutism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS); or
oAutism Diagnostic Int erview Revised (ADI- R).
Other known evidence- based diagnostic tools may be used, but only in addition t o
t
he tools listed above.
If submitting standardized instruments that are over one year old, an independent
provider must submit recent clinical notes describing behaviors which demonstrat e
t
he member still has ASD and would benefit from ABA therapy services.
•SMART goals  - Specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and time -bound.
•Qualified practitioner  - To make a definitive diagnosis of ASD
oPediatric psychiatrist;
oPsychologist;
oPediatric neurologist; or
oDevelopmental  pediatrician.Applied Behavior Analysis Therapy 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder MP-MM -1329  
Effective Date: 11/01/2022  
3 
•Independent practitioner  - To provide ABA therapy :
All services provided must be provided by a Behavior Analyst Certification Boar d
(
BACB) certified behavior professional/paraprofessional:
oRegistered Behavioral technician ( RBT);
oBehavioral Analyst Certification Board (BACB) certified assistant behavior
analyst undergraduate level  (BCaBA);
oBACB certified behavior analyst graduate level ( BCBA ); or
oBACB certified behavior analyst doctoral leve ( BCBA-D).
•Supervision  - All supervisory activities as well as supervisor and supervis ee
r
esponsibilities will be in accordance with the board from which the practitioner
received a license.
oServices delivered by an RBT or a BCaBA must be supervised by a BCBA,BCBA- D or a licensed/ registered psychologist certified by the American Board of
Professional Psychology in Behavioral and Cognitive Psychology who has test
ed
i
n ABA.
oA certified RBT, or BCaBA may provide ABA under the supervision of  an
i
ndependent practitioner (supervisor) must be enrolled in the Marketplac e
pr
ogram and affiliate with the organization under which they are employed or
contracted.
oFor Ohio see Section I. State- Specific Information
D. Policy
I.Medical necessity review is required for all ABA services :
A.Baseline then every 6 months thereafter or sooner if clinically necessary.
B.Medical review documentation must be submitted with appropriate
documentation as indicated in section III.
I
I.CareSource supports medical evidence that suggests ABA therapy should begi n
ear
ly in life, ideally by the age of 2, typically lasting up to 4 years, and is subject t o
t
he patient’s response to intervention. Individuals under the age of 21 years  will be
assessed and treatment goals and intensity will be based on the individual’s needs
and progress in treatment to remediate symptoms of the disorder.
I
II.ABA G
eneral Guidelines :
A.An independent practitioner will perform a behavior identification assessment
and develop a treatment plan before services are provided. Behavioral
assessments are generally not to exceed 8 hours every 6 months unless
additional justification is provided.
B.For initiation of ABA services, documentation needs to show medical necessit y
t
hrough  the following criteria:
1.Definitive primary diagnos is should be made by a qualified practitioner who
has a clinical relationship with the member and is independent of the ABAprovider.
2.ABA will be provided by an independent practitioner .
3.Behavioral, psychological, developmental, and medical history
a.ABA provided as part of the school/home  program shoul
d be
c
oordinated to assure medical necessity; and the goals are not to be
education related, but will focus on targeted symptoms, behaviors, andfunctional impairments . The hours spent in a school/home school  setting
should be included. If submitted, an individualized educational program(IEP)  will be included in the review.Applied Behavior Analysis Therapy 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder MP-MM -1329  
Effective Date: 11/01/2022  
4 
b.Includes a history with symptom intensity and symptom duration; as well
as demonstrate how the symptoms affect the member’s ability to
function in various settings such as with family  members , peer s, and in
school01.Includes evidence of previous therapy such as ABA, speech therapy,
and occupational therapy if applicable
02. Includes  type, duration, results of therapy and how the results will
influence the proposed treatment
c.Includes evidence of coordination with other disciplines involved in t
he
as
sessment such as occupational therapy and speech therapy.
4.Treatment plan for child and caregiver/family training must include ALL of
the following:a.The treatment plan developed will describe treatment activities and
goals and documentation of active participation by the recipient's
caregiver/family in the implementation of the treatment program.
b.Includes baseline objectives that are clearly related to target behaviors.
Measurable  SMART goals that define how member improvement will
 be
not
ed. Outcome oriented interventions, frequency of treatment (i.e.
number of hours per week), and duration of treatment.
c.Includes outcome performance- based individualized goals based  on
behav
ioral assessment and a standardized developmental and/or
functional skills assessment/curriculum such as Verbal Behavior
Milestones Assessment and Placement Program (VB -MAPP) or
Assessment of Basic Language and Learning Skills (ABLLS -R).
d.Includes prescription with number of ABA hours requested per week  and
m
ust be based on the member’s specific needs and not on a general
program structure as evidenced by all of the following:01.Treatment is provided at the lowest level of intensity appropriate to t
he
m
ember’s clinical needs and goals;
02.Detailed description of problems, goals and interventions support the
need for requested intensity of treatment;  and
03.N
umber of hours requested reflects actual number of hours inten ded
t
o be provided.
e.Includes a plan to modify intensity and duration over time based on the
child’s progress. Discharge plan should be individualized and specific toeach child’s treatment needs.
f.Caregiver/Family Training (as described above in the definitions) also
includes the following:
01.Will be individualized to the caregiver/family needs, values, priorities,and circumstances.
02.Will be performance- based and based on child’s assessment and
treatment needs such as teaching parents to implement behavioraltechniques in the home; or work on adaptive living skills in the homeenvironment.
03.Will be include d in the treatment plan with a focus on target
ed
s
ymptoms, behaviors, and functional impairments.
g.ABA services must include documentation of parent/family training.
I
V.Initial Authorization for ABA Evaluation and Treatment Plan Creation
A.A licensed ABA practitioner will perform a behavior identification assessmentand develop a treatment plan before services are provided. BehavioralApplied Behavior Analysis Therapy 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder MP-MM -1329  
Effective Date: 11/01/2022  
5 
assessments are generally not to exceed 8 hours every 6 months unless  
additional justification is provided. 
B.For initiation of ABA services, documentation needs to show medical necessity
through the following criteria:
1.Diagnosis should be made and confirmed in early childhood by a qualifi ed
heal
thcare provider as outlined above.
2.Completion of  a comprehensive diagnostic evaluation should include areferral for ABA Therapy services, using one of the following standardiz
ed
di
agnostic assessment tools as described above in the definitions.
3.The final diagnosis must be made by a licensed psychologist, physician orother licensed practitioner acting within their scope of practice under statelaw.
V.A
uthorization for Initial Course of Treatment
A.PA requests must document the following:
1.Once ABA evaluation is authorized and completed, treatment plan goals a nd
hour
s must be submitted for approval.
2.Individual treatment plan submitted by the treating BCBA,including:a.The patient’s behavioral, psychological, medical and family concerns.
b.Previous ABA Therapy services  including:01.Durati
on
02.Ty
pe of therapy received
03.Results
c.When previous ABA  Therapy information is unknown, provi de
doc
umentation regarding why the information is not accessible and how
this will affect treatment.
d.Quantitative goals based on standardized assessments addressi ng
behav
iors the treatment plan is designed to treat, i ncluding:
01.Base line measurements
02.Progress reports
03.Timelines to reach treatment goals according to the initial assessment
and period assessments over the course of treatment.
e.The specific number of hours a week requested for treatment based o n
t
he member’s needs. Benefit has been shown at various intensities of
service.
01.CareSource will approve a range of hours depending on the following:
(1)Member’s needs;
(2)Clinical- based evidence models supporting treatment efficacy
and efficiency;
(3)Clear  clinical documentation of target behaviors;
(4)Member’s response to treatment;
(5)Parental participation; an d
(
6)Utilization of prior approved hours.
f.Regular review and adjustment of hours per week is required t o
addr
essbehavioral goals. When original authorized treatment plan hours
vary, documentation regarding must be provided.
3.Parent/guardian training individualized for each member’s needs, including:a.Documented plans for the training;
b.Parent/guardian’s ability to and willingness to learn and use therapytechniques in the home setting;
4.School transition plans:Applied Behavior Analysis Therapy 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder MP-MM -1329  
Effective Date: 11/01/2022  
6 
a.Attendance at school if age appropriate;
b.Plans to transition to school if not currently attending; and
c.plans to be able to attend school without additional ABA therapy outsi de
t
he   school setting.
5.Documentation that a licensed or certified behavior analyst will be providi ng
t
he ABA therapy services.
VI.Fo
r continuation of ABA services, documentation needs to show  ALL of the followi ng
c
riteria :
A.Definitive diagnosis of autism persists, and member continues to demonstrat e
A
SD symptoms that will benefit from treatment.
B.Treatment plan as noted in I II.5. plu s the following updates:
1.An updated progress report including treatment plan and assessment
scores that notes improvement/member’s response to treatment frombaseline targeted symptoms, behaviors, and functional impairments.
2.There is a reasonable expectation based upon a CareSource medicalnecessity determination that the member would benefit from continued ABAtherapy.
VII. D
iscontinuation of ABA Therapy
A.Generally accepted medical research and practice indicates that ABA therapy is
not intended to be a lifelong treatment, and when treatment isn’t maki ng
s
ignificant meaningful progress , it should be titrated and discontinued.
B.A
ny of the following criteria may result in a discontinuation of ABA therapy (this
list is not all inclusive):
1.M
ember is unable to demonstrate meaningful progress in member’s behavior
for two successive authorization periods as demonstrated throughstandardized assessments;
2.
A
BA therapy is making symptoms worsen; or
3. Member’s symptoms have stabilized to where the member can be dischar ged
t
o a less intensive type of treatment to manage their symptoms
VIII.Tel
ehealth
A.Caregiver/Family Training and supervision may be provided by telehealth ;
how
ever, ABA 1:1 therapy will not be reimbursed.
IX.E
xclusions
A.Only evidence -based interventions based in behavior analysis will  be
r
eimbursed.
B.Reimbursement is not permitted under any of the following situations:1.Services or activities  not stated in the treatment plan;
2.Services or activities based on experimental behavior methods or mode
3.Education and related services or activities as described for the individualunder the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004,
20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.  (IDEA);
4.Services or activities that are vocational in nature and otherwise available t
o
t
he recipient through a program funded under Section 110 of t he
R
ehabilitation Act of 1973; or
5.Services or activities that are a component of adult day care programs.
C.When solely based on the benefit of the family, caregiver or therapist;
D.When solely focused on recreational or educational outcomes;
E.When making symptoms worse or when member is showing regression;Applied Behavior Analysis Therapy 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder MP-MM -1329  
Effective Date: 11/01/2022  
7 
F.For symptoms and/or behaviors that are not part of core symptoms of AS D
(
e.g., impulsivity due to ADHD, reading difficulties due to learning disabilities, or
excessive worry due to an anxiety disorder).  Other treatments will  be
c
onsidered to treat symptoms not associated with autism;
G.If academic or adaptive deficits are included in the treatment plan, the focus
should be on addressing autistic symptoms that are impeding these deficits i n
t
he home environment (i.e. reduce frequency of self -stimulatory behavior t o
al
low child to be able to follow through with toilet training or complete a
m
athematic sorting task) rather than on any academic targets;
H.When ABA therapy services are not expected to bring measurable functionalimprovement or measurable functional improvement is not documented;
I.When therapy services are duplicative in addressing the same behavioral goals
using the same techniques as the treatment plan, including services perform
ed
under
 an IEP;
J.For more than one program manager/lead behavioral therapist for a member at
any one ti me;
K.For more than one agency/organization providing ABA therapy services for amember at any one time;
L.Services provided by family or household members are not covered.
M.Treatment will not be covered if the care is primarily custodial in nature (that do
not require the special attention of trained/professional ABA staff), shadow, para-
professional, or companion services in any setting.
N.Personal training or life coaching.
O.Services that are more costly than an alternative service or services, which are atleast as likely to produce equivalent diagnostic or therapeutic results for th
e
pat
ient’s disorder.
P.Any program or service performed in nonconventional settings (even if t he
se
rvices are primarily performed  by a licensed provider), including:  spas/resorts;
vocational or recreational settings; Outward Bound; and wilderness, camp or
ranch programs.
NO
TE: Compliance with the provisions in this policy may be monitored and addr essed 
through post payment data analysis, subsequent medical review audits, recovery 
of overpayments identified, and provider prepay review.  
E.C
onditions of Coverage
NA
F.Related Policies/Rules
Applied Behavior Analysis for Autism Spectrum Disorder Administrative  policies
Medical Records Documentation for Practitioners policyMedical Necessity policyApplied Behavior Analysis Therapy 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder MP-MM -1329  
Effective Date: 11/01/2022  
8 
G.Review /Revision History
DATE  ACTION  
Date Issued  10/04/2018  
Date Revised  01/27/2020  
01/
25/2021  
08/
31/2021  
08/
17/2022  Added program attributes, definitions of provider 
types and of ABA, title changed, clarified 
services needing a PA, changed NP to health 
care provider trained in ASD, added IV, added 
willingness to participate in program, added 
description of plan of care, added ages, clarified 
provider requirements, added must have ASD 
diagnosis, added home school and IEP, added 
documentation requirements, added must 
include type of ASD treatment program with PA, revised continuation of AGA therapy 
requirements, Added AFLS, ESDM and PEAK-
DT assessments,  revised discontinuation 
criteria, added section on transitioning ABA 
therapy to school environment, revised exclusions, and removed PA checklist.   
Clarified telehealth coverage, moved documentation requirements to Medical Records 
Documentation for Practitioners policy, and 
removed transition to school section/updated school section.  Updated definitions.  Updated 
ABA criteria. Updated RBT supervision.  
Background – added ABA services  may be 
provided in centers or at home.  To sec. DIII 5.g. 
ABA services must include parent/family training 
or may be subject to denial.  Edited Sec. V. 
Removed VII. A  
Used combined template. Updated references. 
Removed Sec. III.B.2. stating that an  ABA 
order/recommendation from a provider other than one who has a financial relationship with 
the ABA entity that is planning to provide these services; Called out the distinct s eparate steps 
for Initial Authorization for ABA  Evaluation and 
Treatment Plan Creation, Authorization for Initial 
Course of Treatment, and Continuation of ABA Services;  Combined telehealth. Added VIII. A.  
Only evidence -based interventions based in 
behavior analysis will be reimbursed . In VIII. P, 
we state that for program or service performed in 
nonconventional settings (even if the services 
are primarily  performed by a licensed provider ). 
Date Effective  11/01/2022  
Date Archived  Applied Behavior Analysis Therapy 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder MP-MM -1329  
Effective Date: 11/01/2022  
9 
H.References
1.American Academy of Pediatrics (n.d.). Autism Initiatives.  Retrieved August 4, 2022
from www.aap.org.
2.The Behavior Analyst Certification Board.  (2020. November). BCBA Handbook
Retrieved on August 4, 2022 from www.bacb.com .
3.The B
ehavior Analyst Certification Board. (2020, November). Registered Behavioral
Technician Handbook.  Retrieved August 4, 2022 from www.bacb.com.
4.The Council of Autism Service Providers. (2020). Applied Behavior Analysis
Treatment of Autism Spectrum Disorder:  Practice Guidelines for Healthcare Funders
and Managers.  Retrieved on August 4, 2022 from www.casproviders.org.
5.Crockett, J. L., & Fleming, R. K. (2007). Parent training: Acquisiti on and
gener
alization. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 28, 23- 36.
6.Dixon, Mark. (n.d.). PEAK Relational training system Evidence -based autism
assessment and treatment.
7.Gresham, F. M., Beebe -Frankenberger, M. E., & MacMillan, D. L. (1999). A selectiv e
r
eview of treatments for children with autism: Description and methodological
considerations. School Psychology review, 559 -575.
8.Lord C, Rutter M, Goode S, et al.  (1989). Autism diagnostic observation schedule:  a
s
tandardized observation of communicative and social behavior . J Autism De v
Dis
ord 19 (2): 185– 212
9.P
artington, J. & Mueller, M. (n.d.). AFLS® - The Assessment of Functional Livi ng
S
kills. Retrieved July 20, 2022 from www.partingtonbehavioranalysts.com
10.Partingon, J. (2006). (ABLLS- R) Assessment of Basic Language and Learning Skills,
Revised.
11.Rogers, S. & Dawson, G. (2010). Early Start Denver Model for Young Children with
Autism Checklist.
12.Rutter, M., LeCouteur A. et al. (2003). AIDTM-R Autism Diagnostic interview, Revised
13.S
undberg, M. (n.d.). Verbal Behavioral Milestones Assessment and Placement
Program.  Retrieved August 4, 2022 from www.vbmappapp.com .
14.Susan L. Hyman, Susan E. Levy, Scott M. Myers and Council on children wit h
di
sabilities, section on developmental and behavioral pediatrics. Pediatrics  January
2020, 145 (1) e20193447; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019- 3447.
15.Volkmar, F, et al. (2014) . Practice Parameter for the Assessment and Treatment of
Children and Adolescents With Autism Spectrum Disorders . Retrieved August 4,
2022 from www.aacap.org.
16.Weissman, L. (2018, June 28). Autism Spectrum Disorders in Children an d
A
dolescents: Behavioral and Educational Interventions. Retrieved August 4, 2022
from www.uptodate.com
I. S
tate-Specific Information
A.Georgia
1. References
a.GA - Evidence of Coverage and Health Insurance Contract Georgia
2.Effective: 11/01/2022
B.Indiana
1. R
eferences
a.Evidence of Coverage and Health Insurance Contract IndianaApplied Behavior Analysis Therapy 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder MP-MM -1329  
Effective Date: 11/01/2022  
10 
b.Indiana Department of Insurance. (2015, June 17). Payment of Undisputed
ABA Treatment During Appeals Process. Bulletin 216. Retrieved July 20,2022 from https://www.in.gov
c.Indiana Department of Insurance. (2006, March 30). Insurance Coverage forPervasive Development Disorders Bulletin 136. Retrieved July 20, 2022 fromwww.in.gov
d.Indiana Department of Insurance. (2010, April 27). Pervasive Developmental
Disorders Coverage Clarification Bulletin 179. Retrieved July 20, 2022 from
www.in.gov
2.Effective: 11/01/2022
b. K
entucky
Evidence of Coverage and Health Insurance Contract Kentucky
1.Effective: 11/01/2022
c.O
hio
Evidence of Coverage and Health Insurance Contract Ohio
I
n Ohio, in order to independently practice and supervise others in ABA, one must
also be certified under the Ohio Board of Psychology in one of the following 
areas:  
oBCBA (Certified Ohio Behavioral Analyst - COBA)
oBCBA- D (COBA)
1. Effective: 12/01/2022
d.W
est Virginia
Evidence of Coverage and Health Insurance Contract West Virginia
i.Effective: 11/01/2022
The Med ical Policy Stateme nt detailed a bo
ve has r eceived due consideration as 
defined in the Medic al Policy Stateme nt Policy and is a pprove d. 