 
PHARMACY / MEDICAL POLICY – 5.01.593  
Pharmacologic Treatment of Transthyretin- Mediated 
Amyloidosis  
BCBSA Ref. Policy:  5.01.30  
Effective Date:  Feb. 1 , 2023  
Last Revised:  Jan. 10, 2023  
Replaces:  N/A RELATED MEDICAL POLICIES:  
None  
 
Select a hyperlink below to be directed to that section.  
POLICY CRITERIA   |  DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS  |  CODING  
RELATED INFORMATION   |  EVIDENCE REVIEW   |  REFERENCES  |  HISTORY  
∞ Clicking this icon returns you to the hyperlinks menu above.  
 
Introduction  
Amyloid is an abnormal protein. There are many different reasons why the body makes amyloid. 
One cause is a change to the TTR gene. This gene provides instructions to the liver about how to 
make a ceratin protein. But changes to the TTR gene means this liver  protein is faulty. These 
faulty liver proteins get deposited throughout the body and build up over time. This condition is 
known as  hereditary transthyretin- mediated amyloidosis (hATTR). Symptoms like numbness, 
pain and weakness in the arms and legs, heart problems, and stomach and bowel problems 
develop as the condition progresses. One way to treat hATTR is to use certain drugs to reduce 
the amount of TTR protein the liver makes. This policy describes when these types of drugs may 
be considered medically necessary.  
 
Note:    The Introduction section is for your general knowledg e and is not to be taken  as policy coverage criteria. The 
rest of the policy uses specific words and concepts familiar to medical professionals. It is intended for 
providers . A provider can be a person, such as a doctor, nurse, psycholog ist, or dentist. A provider also can 
be a place where medical care is given, like a hospital, clinic, or lab.  This policy informs them about when a 
service may be covered.  
 
Policy Coverage Criteria   
 
5.01.593_PBC (01-10-2023) 
 
 
   
 
 
   
Page | 2 of 15  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
Amvuttra ™ (vutrisiran) SC  
 
Managed under pharmacy  
and medical benefit  Amvuttra ™ (vutrisiran)  may be considered medically necessary 
for the treatment of polyneuropathy of hereditary transthyretin -mediated amyloidosis when : 
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Documented transthyretin (TTR) mutation verified by genetic testing  
AND  
• Presence of symptoms consistent with polyneuropathy of hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis 
o Peripheral sensorimotor polyneuropathy (e.g., tingling or 
increased pain in the hands or feet, loss of feeling or numbness in the hands or feet, carpal tunnel syndrome, 
loss of ability to sense temperature, difficulty with fine 
motor skills, weakness in the legs, difficulty walking)  
OR 
o Autonomic neuro pathy (e.g., postural hypotension, sexual 
dysfunction, recurrent urinary tract infection)  
AND  
• Polyneuropathy disability ( PND ) score IIIb or less or familial 
amyloid polyneuropathy ( FAP) stage 2 or less 
AND  
• Not used in combination with the following: TTR stabilizers 
(e.g., tafamidis, tafamidis meglumine, diflunisal), Onpattro ®, or 
Tegsedi ® 
AND  
• Prescribed by or in consultation with a neurologist 
AND  
• Dose prescribed is 25 mg injected subcutaneously once every 3 
months 
 
Note: Cl inical description of PND score  
• Score 0 = No symptoms  
• Score I = Sensory disturbances but preserved walking capability  
• Score II = Impaired walking capacity but ability to walk without a stick or 
crutches  
• Score IIIA = Walking with the help of one stick or crutch 
• Score IIIB = Walking with the help of two sticks or crutches  Page | 3 of 15  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
• Score IV = Confined to a wheelchair or bedridden  
 
Note: Clinical description of FAP stage  
• Stage 0 = No symptoms  
• Stage 1 = Unimpaired ambulation  
• Stage 2 = Assistance with ambulation required 
• Stage 3 = Wheelchair -bound or bedridden  
Onpattro ® (patisiran) IV  
 
Managed under medical  
benefit Onpattro ® (patisiran ) may be considered medically necessary 
for the treatment of polyneuropathy of hereditary transthyretin -mediated amyloidosis when : 
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Documented transthyretin (TTR) mutation verified by genetic 
testing  
AND  
• Presence of symptoms consistent with polyneuropathy of 
hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis 
o Peripheral sensorimotor polyneuropathy ( e.g., tingling or 
increased pain in the hands or feet, loss of feeling or 
numbness in the hands or feet, carpal tunnel syndrome, 
loss of ability to sense temperature, difficulty with fine 
motor skills, weakness in the legs, difficulty walking) 
      OR  
o Autonomic neuropathy (e.g., postural hypotension, sexual 
dysfunction, recurrent urinary tract infection)  
AND  
• Polyneuropathy disability ( PND ) score IIIb or less or f amilial 
amyloid polyneuropathy ( FAP) stage 2 or less 
AND  
• Not used in combination with the following: TTR stabilizers 
(e.g., tafamidis,  tafamidis meglumine, diflunisal), Amvuttra ™ 
(vutrisiran) , or Tegsedi ® (inotersen)  
AND  
• Prescribed by or in consultation with a neurologist 
AND  
• Dose is based on actual body weight as follows:  
o For individuals weighing less than 100 kg, the dosage is 0.3 mg/kg once every 3 weeks Page | 4 of 15  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
o For individual s weighing 100 kg or more, the dosage is 30 
mg once every 3 weeks 
 
Note:  Clinical description of PND score  
• Score 0 = No symptoms  
• Score I = Sensory disturbances but preserved walking capability  
• Score II = Impaired walking capacity but abili ty to walk without a stick or 
crutches  
• Score IIIA = Walking with the help of one stick or crutch 
• Score IIIB = Walking with the help of two sticks or crutches  
• Score IV = Confined to a wheelchair or bedridden  
 
Note:  Clinical description of FAP stage  
• Stage 0 = No symptoms  
• Stage 1 = Unimpaired ambulation  
• Stage 2 = Assistance with ambulation required 
• Stage 3 = Wheelchair -bound or bedridden  
Tegsedi ® (inotersen) SC  
 
Managed under pharmacy  
and medical benefit  Tegsedi ® (inotersen ) may be considered medically necessary 
for the treatment of polyneuropathy of hereditary transthyretin -mediated amyloidosis when : 
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Documented transthyretin (TTR) mutation verified by genetic 
testing  
AND  
• Presence of symptoms consistent with polyneuropathy of 
hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis 
o Peripheral sensorimotor polyneuropathy (e.g., tingling or 
increased pain in the hands or feet, loss of feeling or 
numbness in the hands or feet, carpal tunnel syndrome, 
loss of  ability to sense temperature, difficulty with fine 
motor skills, weakness in the legs, difficulty walking)  
OR 
o Autonomic neuropathy (e.g., postural hypotension, sexual 
dysfunction, recurrent urinary tract infection)  
AND  
• Polyneuropathy disability ( PND ) score IIIb or less or familial 
amyloid polyneuropathy ( FAP) stage 2 or less 
AND  Page | 5 of 15  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
• Not used in combination with the following: TTR stabilizers 
(e.g., tafamidis, tafamidis meglumine, diflunisal) , Amvuttra ™ 
(vutrisiran) , or Onpattro® (patisiran)  
AND  
• Prescribed by or in consultation with a neurologist  
AND  
• Dose prescribed is 284 mg injected subcutaneously once 
weekly 
 
Note: Cl inical description of PND score 
• Score 0 = No symptoms  
• Score I = Sensory disturbances but preserved walking capability  
• Score II = Impaired walking capacity but ability to walk without a stick or crutches  
• Score IIIA = Walking with the help of one stick or crutch 
• Score IIIB = Walking with the help of two sticks or crutches  
• Score IV = Confined to a wheelchair or bedridden  
 Note: Clinical description of FAP stage  
• Stage 0 = No symptoms  
• Stage 1 = Unimpaired ambulation  
• Stage 2 = Assistance with ambulation required 
• Stage 3 = Wheelcha ir-bound or bedridden  
Vyndamax ™ (tafamidis) , 
Vyndaqel® (tafamidis 
meglumine) oral  
 Managed under pharmacy 
benefit Vyndamax ™ (tafamidis)  and Vyndaqel® (tafamidis 
meglumine) may be considered medically necessary for the 
treatment of cardiomyopathy of wild type  or hereditary 
transthyretin -mediated amyloidosis  (ATTR -CM)  when : 
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Documented wild type or hereditary transthyretin-media ted 
amyloidosis is confirmed with presence of amyloid deposits on 
biopsy specimens  
AND  
• Not used in combination with Amvuttra ™ (vutrisiran) , 
Onpattro® (patisiran) , or Tegsedi ® (inotersen)  
AND  
• Prescribed by or in consultation with a cardiologist  
 Page | 6 of 15  ∞ Drug  Investigational  
Amvuttra ™ (vutrisiran) , 
Onpattro ® (patisiran ), 
Tegsedi® (inotersen), 
Vyndamax ™ (tafamidis),  
Vyndaqel® (tafamidis 
meglumine)  All other uses of Amvuttra ™ (vutrisiran) , Onpattro ® 
(patisiran ), Tegsedi® (inotersen) , Vyndamax ™ (tafamidis), and 
Vyndaqel® (tafamidis meglumine) for conditions not outlined 
in this policy are considered investigational.  
 
Approval  Criteria  
Initial authorization  All drugs listed in policy  may be approved up to 12 months.  
Re-authorization criteria  
for Amvuttra ™, Onpattro ®, 
and Tegsedi® Continued therapy with Amvuttra ™, Onpattro ®, or Tegsedi ® 
will be approved for periods of one year if the above drug 
specific criteria are met and the individual  has shown and 
continues to show:  
• Efficacy documented in the medical record indicating positive 
clinical response ( e.g., improved or stable motor, neurologic, 
cardiac function, or serum TTR levels)  
AND  
• Improvement or stability in one of the following from baseline: 
PND score or FAP stage  
AND  
• Absence of treatment limiting toxicity  
Re-authorization criteria  
for Vyndamax ™ and 
Vyndaqel® Continued therapy with Vyndamax ™ or Vyndaqel®  will be 
approved for periods of one year if the above Vyndamax ™ and 
Vyndaqel® criteria are met and the individual has shown and 
continues to show efficacy documented in the medical record indicating positive clinical response ( e.g., 6-Minute Walk T est 
[6MWT], Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire -Overall 
Summary [KCCQ -OS] score ). 
 
Documentation Requirements  
For Amvuttra ™, Onpattro ®, or Tegsedi ® the individual ’s medical records submitted for 
review should document that medical necessity criteria are met. The record s should include 
the following:  
• Office visit notes that contain the relevant history and physical evaluation information 
AND  Page | 7 of 15  ∞ Documentation Requirements  
• Documented TTR mutation verified by genetic testing  
AND  
• Results of the PND score or FAP stage 
AND  
• Dose and frequency of prescribed medication  
 
For Vyndamax ™ or Vyndaqel® the individual ’s medical records submitted for review should 
document that medical necessity criteria are met. The records should include the following:  
• Office visit notes that contain the relevant history and physical evaluation information  
 
Coding   
 
Code  Description  
HCPCS  
J0222  Injection, patisiran, (Onpattro ®) 0.1 mg  
J0225  Injection, vutrisiran,  (Amvuttra ™ ) 1 mg (new code effective 1/1/2023)  
J3590  Unclassified biologics  (Use to report Tegsedi ®) 
Note:  CPT codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighted by the American Medical Association (AMA). HCPCS 
codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighted by Centers for Medicare Services (CMS).  
 
Related Information   
 
Consideration of Age  
Age limits specified in this policy are determined according to FDA -approved indications, where 
applicable. 
 Page | 8 of 15  ∞ Benefit Application 
The drugs in this policy that are administered  orally (Vyndamax ™ and Vyndaqel® ) are managed  
through the Pharmacy benefit. Drugs administered via IV infusion (Onpattro ®) are managed 
through the Medical benefit. Drugs administered subcutaneously ( Amvuttra ™ and Tegsedi ®) are 
managed through both  the Pharmacy benefit  and Medical benefit. 
 
Evidence Review   
 
Description 
Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (hATTR), formerly known as familial amyloidotic 
polyneuropathy (FAP), is a rare, progressive disorder characterized by the extracellular deposition of TTR protein. hATTR can affect multiple organs and body systems, such as the 
heart, nervous system, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and kidney. Symptoms may include autonomic 
dysfunction, GI dysfunction, ocular manifestation, cardiac manifestation, compromised renal function, or carpal tunnel syndrome. The most common mutation associated with hATTR is 
Val30Met. Although some mutations are associated mainly with polyneuropathy or cardiomyopathy, most individual s have mixed clinical phenotypes. If untreated, death occurs 
about 10 years after onset of hATTR.  
The disease course begins with unimpaired ambulation (FAP stage 1), then requiring ambulation 
(FAP stage 2), which proceeds to wheelchair confine ment (FAP stage 3), where individuals 
experience life- impacting symptoms including burning neuropathic pain, loss of sensation in 
hands and feet, diarrhea/constipation, sexual impotence, and dizziness/fainting . The median 
survival for individ uals with hATTR with polyneuropathy is reported as 5- 15 years.  
hATTR affects at least 10,000 people worldwide with about >120 TTR mutations being reported, with about 3,000-5,000 people in the U.S . However, symptoms of hATTR do not always start in 
one specific organ and the disease is often masked. As a result, these numbers may be underestimated due to under- diagnosis. Quantifying the disease burden in hATTR remains 
challenging since there is no single test that captures all the symptoms of the condition. Tests 
demonstrated that both mental and physical health in individuals with hATTR were substantially lower than an age- match controlled group of individuals not receiving treatment. 
The protein TTR is synthesized and secreted by the liver, where it transports thyroxine and 
retinol . Mutations in TTR destabilize the protein, causing misfolding into a beta -pleated sheet Page | 9 of 15  ∞ configuration and forming insoluble amyloid fibrils. This mutation results in an autosomal 
dominant disorder primarily affecting the nerves and heart. With different mutations, 
symptomatic manifestations may vary even among family members. 
 
Summary of Evidence  
Amvuttra ™ (vutrisiran)  
Vutrisiran was studied in a multicenter, open- label, randomized, Phase 3 study, HELIOS -A.1 The 
trial included 164 individual s with 122 randomized to vutrisiran and 42 to patisiran. Inclusion 
criteria were ages 18- 85 years, h ereditary transthyretin amyloidosis with polyneuropathy 
(hATTR -PN), Karnofsky performance status (KPS) ≥60%, polyneuropathy disability ( PND) ≤IIIb, 
and Neuropathy Impairment Scale (NIS) 5- 130 out of 244 (higher scores indicate greater 
disability). Exclusion criteria included individuals undergoing liver transplantation and those with 
New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III or IV heart failure (HF). Individual s were randomized 
to vutrisiran 25 mg SC every 3 months or patisiran 0.3 mg/kg IV q3 weeks for 18 months. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in Modified Neuropathy Impairment Scale +7 
(mNIS+7 ) at Month 9. Of note, most comparisons including the primary endpoint compared the 
vutrisiran group to the placebo arm of the APOLLO trial. The APOLLO trial was a randomized, double- blind, placebo -controlled trial which randomized 225 individuals with hATTR -PN to 
patisiran or placebo for 18 months.  While the inclusion criteria were similar in both trials, 
several baseline characteristics differed  between HELIOS -A individuals and the APOLLO placebo 
group including mNIS+7, Norfolk quality of life in diabetic neuropathy (QoL -DN), and ten meter 
walk test ( 10-MWT ). At Month 9, the l east square ( LS) mean change in mNIS+7 score was 
significantly less with vutrisiran (indicating less disability) than with the APOLLO placebo group (-2.24 vs 14.76). Of note, this difference was reported to be statistically significant; however, the 
p-value was not provided. At 18 months, the difference in LS mean change in mNIS+7 remained 
significant for vutrisiran ( -0.46 vutrisiran vs 28.1 APOLLO placebo, p=6.50 x10-20). Additionally, 
all other secondary outcomes also significantly favored vutrisiran (Norfolk QOL -DN, 10- MWT, 
modified body mass index [mBMI], and Rasch- built Overall Disability Scale [R -ODS]). Vutrisiran 
was compared to the HELIOS -A patisiran group for the secondary outcome of mean steady state 
transthyretin ( TTR) reduction from baseline; vutrisiran was noninferior to patisiran at 18 months 
(median TTR di fference 5.28%, 95% CI 1.17- 9.25, lower limit of CI > -10%).  
Common adverse events occurring in >10% of individuals were falls, pain in extremity, diarrhea, 
peripheral edema, urinary tract infection (UTI), arthralgia, dizziness. Arthralgia and pain in 
extremity occurred more frequently with vutrisiran than APOLLO placebo. Injection- site Page | 10 of 15  ∞ reactions occurred in 4.1% of individuals on vutrisiran. Serious AEs (SAEs) and severe AEs 
occurred numerically less frequently with vutrisiran than APOLLO placebo or patisiran (SAEs: 
26% vutrisiran, 40% APOLLO placebo, 43% patisiran; severe AEs: 16%, 36%, 38%, respectively). 
Two SAEs (dyslipidemia and UTI) were considered related to vutrisiran. No hepatic, hematologic, 
or renal safety signals were considered related to vutrisiran. No discontinuations due to AEs 
were considered related to vutrisiran. 
 
Onpattro ® (patisiran)  
Fair quality evidence from the Phase 2 and APOLLO studies showed that patisiran 0.3 mg/kg 
intravenously (IV) every three weeks (Q3W) is effective in reducing transthyretin (TTR levels) and 
improving their modified neuropathy impairment scale+7 (mNIS+7) score, respectively, in adults 
diagnosed with hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (hATTR) and neuropathy. The 0.3 mg/kg IV 
Q3W dosing regimen demonstrated the highest maximum TTR knockdown (KD) and TTR KD at 
nadir for both dose 1 (94.2% and 83.8%) and dose 2  (96.0% and 86.7%) compared to other 
dosing regimens (0.01, 0.05,0.15, and 0.3 mg/kg every four weeks [Q4W]). Patisiran showed significant improvement in individuals’ change in mNIS+7 scores from baseline compared to placebo ( -6.03 vs. 27.96), suggesting improvement in autonomic function. This is further proven 
in the Phase 2 open-label extension (OLE) trial, where individuals were on patisiran for 24 months and had a change in mNIS+7 from baseline of - 7.0. Secondary endpoints in the APOLLO 
trial saw improved scores as well, most notably in assessing quality of life using the Norfolk 
quality of life -diabetic neuropathy (QoL -DN) scale (- 6.7 vs. 14.4).  
Mild to moderate adverse events (AEs) were common in patisiran. Most AEs were infused -
related reactions (IRRs), which occurred in 10.3% of individuals in the Phase 2 trial and 18.9% of 
subjects in the patisiran group from the APOLLO trial. The Phase 2 OLE trial demonstrated 
similar results as well with 22.2% of subjects experiencing IRRs. Researchers attempted to 
prevent IRRs by pre- medicating individuals with dexamethasone, acetaminophen, an H1 blocker, 
and an H2 blocker. As a result, pill burden may play a role in adherence and managing AEs. 
Another common AE was peripheral edema (29.7% in patisiran vs. 22.1% in placebo) which 
decreased over time with no individual needing to discontinue treatment. The Phase 2 trial 
reported one individual experiencing a urinary tract infection (UTI), sepsis, nausea, and vomiting. 
Another individual  reported cellulitis, nausea, and vomiting. Because one individual experienced 
these symptoms, it is difficult to associate patisiran with these serious adverse events (SAEs). The 
APOLLO study had 36.5% of the patisiran group experience a SAE. The most common SAE found 
was diarrhea in 5.4% of individual s. No increase in observed frequency of events for patisiran 
compared to placebo group by SOC.  Page | 11 of 15  ∞  
Tegsedi ® (inotersen)  
In the Phase III trial NEURO -TTR trial, inotersen treatment  slowed the progression of 
polyneuropathy relative to placebo and stabilized neuropathy- related quality of life (QOL). The 
statistically significant treatment difference in mNIS+7 reflected progression in the placebo 
group and delayed progression in the inotersen group, though many inotersen individuals 
reported improved neuropathy scores. Open-label extension (OLE) data suggest sustained delay 
of progression of polyneuropathy, though neuropathy- related QOL gain may not be durable. 
Cardiac endpoints did not differ statistically between the inotersen group and placebo group 
after 15 months of intervention; however, the trial was not powered to detect differences in 
cardiac outcomes. A small single- arm open label study shows minimal worsening of left 
ventricular mass.  
Five deaths were reported during the study, all of which occurred in the inotersen group, 
through 15 months of treatment. Four deaths were considered related to disease progression 
and one death was considered possibly inotersen- related. Safety data show two key concerns 
with inotersen treatment: thrombocytopenia and glomerulonephritis. Frequent platelet and renal 
monitoring implemented during the Phase III NEURO- TTR trial suggests thrombocytopenia and 
decreased renal function may be manageable through enhanced monitoring. Adverse events consi dered related to treatment were more frequently reported by inotersen individuals 
compared to placebo individuals. Anti- inotersen antibodies were reported in 30.4% of NEURO -
TTR individuals. These antibodies typically develop after a median of 200 days of treatment and 
did not appear to affect drug efficacy, but individuals with such antibodies reported more injection site reactions.  
 
Vyndamax ™ and Vyndaqel®  
Tafamidis was studied in a large, multicenter, placebo -controlled, double- blind, 30- month, 
Phase 3 trial (ATTR -ACT trial) which randomized 441 individuals with transthyretin amyloid 
cardiomyopathy (AATR- CM) to tafamidis 80 mg/day, tafamidis 20 mg/day, or placebo. The study 
included adults up to 90 years of age with confirmed amyloid transthyretin wild type ( ATTRwt ) 
or amyloid transthyretin due to a mutation (ATTRm) with amyloid cardiac involvement and heart 
failure ( HF). The primary outcome measures were all -cause mortality and CV- related 
hospitalization which were assessed hierarchically. The study used the Finkelstein- Schoenfeld 
method to assess statistical significance. This method pairs each individual in a given strata with 
every other individual in that strata, assigning a +1 to the better individual  and -1 to the worse Page | 12 of 15  ∞ individual based on all- cause mortality followed by cardiovascular (CV )-related hospitalization if 
both individuals remain alive. These values are summed to create the test statistic. According to 
the Finkelstein- Schoenfeld method, pooled tafamidis was superior to placebo over 30 months 
(p<0.001) with a win ratio of 1.695 (95% CI 1.255- 2.289). All -cause mortality was significantly 
decreased with pooled tafamidis compared to placebo with a 30% risk reduction (HR 0.7, 95% CI 
0.51- 0.96).  The risk of CV- related hospitalization significantly decreased with pooled tafamidis 
compared to placebo (RR 0.68, 95% CI 0.56- 0.81). The least squares (LS) mean change from 
baseline to month 30 in the 6- minute walk test ( 6MWT ) and the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy 
Questionnaire – overall summary (KCCQ -OS) both significantly favored pooled tafamidis (6MWT: 
-55 vs - 131 tafamidis vs placebo, p<0.001; KCCQ -OS -7 vs -21 respectively, p<0.001).  All 
assessments met criteria for clinical as well as statistical significance. Subgroup assessment 
found results favored tafamidis in all -cause mortality and CV -hospitalization except for CV-
related hospitalization in New York Heart Association ( NYHA) Class III individual s which 
significantly favored placebo. Of note, no difference in all -cause mortality was seen with the 
20 mg dose of tafamidis compared to the 80 mg dose (26.1% vs 27.8%, respectively, statistical 
analysis not performed). 
The prescribing information for tafamidis describes adverse events ( AEs) seen with tafamidis as 
equivalent to placebo. In the ATTR -ACT trial, none of the AEs seen with tafamidis occurred with 
an incidence ≥4% greater than the incidence seen with placebo. There are no contraindications 
or warnings. According to the prescribing information, in the 30- month placebo -controlled  
study, discontinuation due to AEs occurred in 7% of individuals on Vyndaqel 80 mg, 6% on 
Vyndaqel 20 mg, and 6% on placebo. Of note, the published ATTR -ACT trial lists dis continuation 
rates due to treatment -emergent AEs (TEAEs) as 21.2% with tafamidis and 28.8% with placebo 
and temporary discontinuation due to TEAE as 20.1% and 26%, respectively.  
 
2020  Update  
A literature search from 12 /1/2019 through 6 /30/2020 did not identify new information 
requiring change to the medical policy criteria. 
 
2021  Update  
Reviewed prescribing information for all drugs in policy and conducted a  literature search on the 
management  of the polyneuropathy and cardiomyopathy  of hereditary transthyretin- mediated Page | 13 of 15  ∞ amyloidosis . No new information was identified that would require changes to the medical 
policy criteria. 
 
2022  Update  
Reviewed prescribing information for all drugs in policy and conducted a  literature search on the 
management  of transthyretin- mediated amyloidosis. No new information was identified that 
would require changes to the medical policy criteria. 
  
References   
 
1. Amvuttra ™ (vutrisiran)  prescribing information. Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Cambridge, MA. Revised June  2022. 
2. Onpattro ® (patisiran) prescribing information.  Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Cambridge, MA. Revised May  2021. 
3. Tegsedi ® (inotersen) prescribing information. Akcea Therapeutics, Inc. Revised May  2021. 
4. What Is Hereditary ATTR Amyloidosis (hATTR)? hATTR Amyloidosis. https://www.hattrguide.com/about- hattr -amyloidosis/ . 
Accessed April  22, 2022. 
5. Gertz M. Hereditary ATTR Amyloidosis: Burden of Illness and Diagnostic Challenges. American Journal of Managed Care. 
2017;23.  
6. ICER. Institute for Clinical and Economic Review. Inotersen and Patisiran for Hereditary Transthyretin Amyloidosis: Effectiveness 
and Value. Published October 4, 2018.  
7. Vyndamax ™ (tafamidis) and Vyndaqel® (tafamidis meglumine) prescribing information. Pfizer Labs . Revised June  2021. 
8. Maurer MS, Schwartz JH, Gundapaneni B, et al. Tafamidis treatment for patients with transthy -retin amyloid cardiomyopathy. N 
Engl J Med. 2018;379(11):1007- 1016. 
9. Maurer MS, Elliott P, Merlini G, et al. Design and rationale of the Phase 3 ATTR -ACT clinical trial (tafamidis in transthyretin 
cardiomyopathy  clinical tria l). Circ Heart Fail. 2017;10:e003815.  
10. Fontana M, Rajkumar S, McKenna W, Dardas T. Amyloid cardiomyopathy: Treatment and prognosis . UpToDate, topic last 
updated Mar 23, 2021. Accessed December 1, 2021.  
11. González -Duarte A, Adams D, Tournev IL, et al. HELIOS -A: results from the phase 3 study of vutrisiran in patients with hereditary 
transthyretin- mediated amyloidosis with polyneuropathy [poster]. Presented at: the 71st Annual Scientific Session of the 
Ameri can College of Cardiology; Washington, DC; April 2 -4, 2022.  
12. Péus D, Newcomb N, Hofer S. Appraisal of the Karnofsky Performance Scale and proposal of a simple algorithmic system for its 
evaluation. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2013;13:72.  
13. Dyck PJ, Gonzάlez -Duarte A, Obici L, et al. Development of measures of polyneuropathy impairment in hATTR amyloidosis: from 
NIS to mNIS+7. Neurol Sci. 2019;405:116424.  Page | 14 of 15  ∞ 14. Luigetti M, Romano A, Di Paolantonio A, Bisogni G, Sabatelli M. Diagnosis and treatment of hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis 
(hATTR) polyneuropathy: current perspectives on improving patient care. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2020;16:109 -123. 
15. Schmidt HH, Waddington- Cruz M, Botteman MF, et al. Estimating the global prevalence of transthyretin familial amyloid 
polyneuropathy. Muscle Nerve. 2018;57:829- 837. 
 
History   
 
Date  Comments  
04/01/19  New policy, approved March 12, 2019. Add to Prescription Drug section.  Onpattro 
(patisiran) and Tegsedi (inotersen) may be considered medically necessary when 
criteria are met. They are considered investigational for all other uses.   
10/01/19  Coding update, added HCPCS code J0222 (new code effective 10/1/19).  
12/01 /19 Interim Review, approved November 12,  2019.  Added coverage criteria for Vyndamax 
(tafamidis) and Vyndaqel (tafamidis meglumine). 
11/01 /20 Annual Review, approved October 22, 2020. No change to policy statement s. Removed 
HCPCS J3490.  
01/01/22  Annual Review, approved December 2 , 2021.  No changes to policy statements.  
06/01 /22 Annual Review, approved May 9 , 2022.  No changes to policy statements.  
08/01 /22 Interim  Review, approved July 12 , 2022.  Added coverage criteria for Amvuttra 
(vutrisiran) for the treatment of the polyneuropathy of hereditary transthyretin-
mediated amyloidosis in adults.  Updated criteria for Onpattro, Tegsedi, Vyndamax, and 
Vyndaqel documenting these drugs are not to be  used  in combination with Amvuttra.  
01/01/23  Coding u pdate.  Added new HCPC code J0225 for Amvuttra ™. Removed Amvuttra ™ 
from HCPC code J3590.  
02/01 /23 Interim  Review, approved January 10 , 2023.  Removed from Amvuttra the requirement 
to try and fail Onpattr o or Tegsed i first.  Changed the wording from "patient" to 
"individual" throughout the policy for standardization. 
 
Disclaimer : This medical policy is a guide in evaluating the medical necessity of a particular servic e or treatment. The 
Company adopts policies after careful review of published peer -reviewed scientific literature, national guidelines and 
local standards of practice. Since medical technology is constantly changing, the Company reserves the right to revie w 
and update policies as appropriate. Member contracts differ in their benefits. Always consult the member benefit 
booklet or contact a member service representative to determine coverage for a specific medical service or supply. 
CPT codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighted by the American Medical Association (AMA). © 2023  Premera 
All Rights Reserved.  Page | 15 of 15  ∞ Scope : Medical policies are systematically developed guidelines that serve as a resource for Company staff when 
determining coverage for specific medical procedures, drugs or devices. Coverage for medical services is subject to 
the limits and conditions of the member benefit plan. Members and their providers should consult the member 
benefit booklet or contact a customer service representative to determine whether there are any benefit limitations 
applicable to this service or supply. This medical policy does not apply to Medicare Advantage.  Premera Blue Cross is a n independent licensee of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association  serving businesses and residents of Alaska and Washington State, excluding C lark County.   
052493  (07-01-2021) Discrimination is Against the Law  
Premera Blue Cross  (Premera) complies with applicable Federal and Washington state civil rights laws and does not discriminate on the basis of race, 
color, national o rigin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation . Premera does not exclude people or treat them differently because of race, 
color, national origin, age, disability , sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation.  Premera  provides free aids and services to people with disabilities to 
communica te effectively with us, such as q ualified sign language interpreters  and w ritten information in other formats (large print, audio, accessible 
electronic formats, other formats) . Premera p rovides fre e language services to people whose primary language is not English, such as  qualified interpreters  
and i nformation written in other languages . If you need these services, contact the Civil Rights Coordinator.  If you believe that Premera has failed to 
provide these services or discriminated in another way on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation , 
you can file a grievance with:  Civil Rights Coordinator ─ Complaints and Appeals , PO Box 91102 , Seattle, WA 98111 , Toll free : 855-332-4535 , Fax: 425-918-5592 , 
TTY: 711 , Email  AppealsDepartmentInquiries@Premera.com . You can file a grievance in person or by mail, fax, or email.  If you need help filing a 
grievance, the Civil Rights Coordinator is available to help you.  You can also file a civil rights complaint with the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office for Civil Rights, electronically through the Office for Civil Righ ts Complaint Portal, available at  https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/portal/lobby.jsf , 
or by mail or phone at:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,  200 Independence Ave SW, Room 509F, HHH B uilding , Washington, D.C. 20201, 
1-800-368-1019,  800-537-7697 (TDD). Complaint forms are available at  http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/office/file/index.html .  
Washington  residents : You can also file a civil rights complaint wi th the Washington State Office of the Insurance Commissioner, electronically through 
the Office of the Insurance Commissioner Complaint Portal available at https://www.insurance.wa.gov/file -complaint -or-check -your-complaint -status , or by 
phone at 800 -562-6900, 360 -586-0241 (TDD). Complaint forms are available at https: //fortress.wa.gov/oic/onlineservices/cc/pub/complaintinformation.aspx .  
Alaska  residents : Contact the Alaska Division of Insurance via email at insurance@alaska.gov , or by phone at 907-269-7900 or 1 -800-INSURAK  (in-state, 
outside Anchorage) . 
Language Assistance  
ATENCIÓN : si habla español, tiene a su disposición servicios gratuitos de asistencia lingüística. Llame al 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
PAUNAWA : Kung nagsasalita ka ng Tagalog , maaari kang gumamit ng mga serbisyo ng tulong sa wika nang walang bayad. Tumawag sa  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
注意：如果您使用繁體中文，您可以免費獲得語言援助服務。請致電  800-722-1471  (TTY：711）。 
CHÚ Ý : Nếu bạn nói Tiếng Việt, có các dịch vụ hỗ trợ ngôn ngữ miễn phí dành cho b ạn.  Gọi số 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711). 
주의: 한국어를  사용하시는  경우, 언어 지원 서비스를  무료로  이용하실  수 있습니다 . 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711)  번으로  전화해  주십시오 . 
ВНИМАНИЕ : Если вы говорите на русском языке, то вам доступны бесплатные услуги перевода.  Звоните  800-722-1471  (телетайп: 711). 
LUS CEEV : Yog tias koj hais lus Hmoob , cov kev pab txog lus, muaj  kev pab dawb  rau koj. Hu rau 800-722-1471  (TTY:  711).  
MO LOU SILAFIA : Afai e te tautala  Gagana fa'a Sāmoa, o loo iai auaunaga  fesoasoan, e fai fua e leai se totogi, mo oe,  Telefoni mai:  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ໂປດຊາບ: ຖ້າວ່າ ທ່ານເວ ້າພາສາ ລາວ, ການບໍລິການຊ່ວຍເຫ  ຼື ອດ້ານພາສາ, ໂດຍບໍ່ເສ ັ ຽຄ່າ, ແມ່ນມ ີພ້ອມໃຫ້ທ່ານ. ໂທຣ 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711) . 
注意事項 ：日本語を話される場合、無料の言語支援をご利用いただけます。 800-722-1471  （TTY:711）まで、お電話にてご連絡ください。  
PAKDAAR : Nu saritaem ti Ilocano, ti serbisyo para ti baddang ti lengguahe nga awanan bayadna, ket sidadaan para kenyam.  Awagan ti  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
УВАГА!  Якщо ви розмовляєте українською мовою, ви можете звернутися до безкоштовної служби мовної підтримки.  Тел ефонуйте за 
номером 800 -722-1471  (телетайп:  711). 
ប្រយ័ត្ន៖   បរើសិនជាអ្នកនិយាយ  ភាសាខ្មែរ , បសវាជំនួយខ្ននកភាសា បោយមិនគិត្ឈ្ ន ួល គឺអាចមានសំរារ់រំបរ ើ អ្នក។  ចូរ ទូរស័ព្ទ   800-722-1471 ( TTY: 711)។ 
ማስታወሻ :  የሚናገሩት  ቋንቋ ኣማርኛ  ከሆነ የትርጉም  እርዳታ ድርጅቶች፣  በነጻ ሊያግዝዎት  ተዘጋጀተዋል፡  ወደ ሚከተለው  ቁጥር ይደውሉ  800-722-1471 (መስማት  ለተሳናቸው : 711). 
XIYYEEFFANNAA : Afaan  dubbattu  Oroomiffa , tajaajila  gargaarsa  afaanii , kanfaltiidhaan  ala, ni argama . Bilbilaa  800-722-1471 ( TTY: 711).  
ملحوظة:  إذا كنت تتحدث اذكر اللغة، فإن خدمات المساعدة اللغوية تتوافر لك بالمجان.  اتصل برقم   1471-722-800    :(رقم هاتف الصم والبكم711 .) 
ਧਿਆਨ  ਧਿਓ: ਜੇ ਤੁਸੀਂ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ  ਬੋਲਿੇ ਹੋ, ਤਾਂ ਭਾਸ਼ਾ ਧ ਿੱਚ ਸਹਾਇਤਾ  ਸੇ ਾ ਤੁਹਾਡੇ ਲਈ ਮੁਫਤ ਉਪਲਬਿ  ਹੈ। 800-722-1471 (TTY:  711) 'ਤੇ ਕਾਲ ਕਰੋ। 
เรียน : ถ้าคุณพูดภาษาไทยคุณสามารถใช้บริการช่วยเหลือทางภาษาได้ฟรี  โทร 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ACHTUNG : Wenn Sie Deutsch sprechen, stehen Ihnen kostenlos sprachliche Hilfsdienstleistungen zur Verfügung. Rufnummer: 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
UWAGA : Jeżeli mówisz po polsku, możesz skorzystać z bezpłatnej pomocy językowej. Zadzwoń pod numer 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATANSYON : Si w pale Kreyòl Ayisyen, gen sèvis èd pou lang ki disponib gratis pou ou.  Rele 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATTENTION  : Si vous parlez français, des services d'aide linguistique vous sont proposés gratuitement.  Appelez le 800 -722-1471  (ATS :  711).  
ATENÇÃO : Se fala português, encontram -se disponíveis serviços linguísticos, grátis.  Ligue para 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATTENZIONE : In caso la lingua parlata sia l'italiano, sono disponibili servizi di assistenza linguistica gratuiti. Chiamare il numero  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).   
 توجه: اگر به زبان فارسی گفتگو می کنید، تسهیالت زبانی بصورت رايگان برای شما فراهم می باشد. با   (TTY: 711) 1471-722-800   .تماس بگیريد 