 
 Medical Necessity Guidelines:  
Alpha 1-Proteinase Inhibitors 
 
 Alpha 1-Proteinase Inhibitors  
1    
Effective: January 1,  2023  
Prior Authorization Required  
If REQUIRED , submit supporting clinical documentation pertinent to service request.  Yes ☒ No ☐ 
 
Applies  to: 
Commercial  Products  
☒ Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Commercial products ; Fax 617-673-0988  
☒ Tufts Health Plan Commercial products ; Fax 617-673-0988  
  CareLinkSM – Refer to CareLink P rocedures, Services and Items Requiring Prior Authorization  
 
Public Plans Products  
☒ Tufts Health Direct – A Massachusetts Qualified Health Plan (QHP) (a commercial product) ; Fax 617-673-0988  
☐ Tufts Health Together – MassHealth MCO Plan and Accountable Care Partnership Plans ; Fax 617-673-0988  
☒ Tufts Health RITogether – A Rhode Island Medicaid Plan; Fax 617-673-0988  
☐ Tufts Health Unify * – OneCare Plan (a dual -eligible product) ; Fax 617-673-0956  
*The MNG applies to Tufts Health Unify members unless a less restrictive LCD or NCD exists.  
 
Senior Products  
☐ Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Stride Medicare Advantage;  Fax 617-673-0956  
☐ Tufts Health Plan Senior Care Options (SCO), (a dual-eligible product) ; Fax 617-673-0956  
☐ Tufts Medicare Preferred HMO, (a Medicare Advantage product) ; Fax 617-673-0956  
☐ Tufts Medicare Preferred PPO , (a Medicare Advantage product) ; Fax 617-673-0956  
 
Note:  While you may not be the provider responsible for obtaining prior authorization, as a condition of payment you will 
need to ensure  that prior authorization has been obtained.  
 
Overview  
Deficiency of alpha1- proteinase inhibitor (A1- PI), also known as alpha1 -antitrypsin deficiency, is characterized by reduced 
levels of A1- PI in the blood and lungs. A1- PI deficiency is an autosomal, co- dominant, hereditary disorder. Patients with 
severe A1- PI deficiency have increased levels of neutrophil and neutrophil elastase levels in lung epithelial lining fluid which 
results in unopposed destruction of the connective tissue framework of the lung parenchyma. A1- PI (human) therapy 
augments the level of the deficient protein and theoretically corrects the imbalance bet ween neutrophil elastase and 
protease inhibitors, which may protect the lower respiratory tract.   
  
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Approved Indications:  
• ARALAST NP® (alpha1 -proteinase inhibitor [human])   
ARALAST NP is an Alpha1 -Proteinase Inhibitor (Hu man) (Alpha1 -PI) indicated for chronic augmentation therapy in 
adults with clinically evident emphysema due to severe congenital deficiency of Alpha1 -PI (alpha1 -antitrypsin 
deficiency). ARALAST NP increases antigenic and functional (anti -neutrophil elastas e capacity, ANEC) serum levels 
and antigenic lung epithelial lining fluid levels of Alpha1- PI.   
ARALAST NP is not indicated as therapy for lung disease in patients in whom severe Alpha1- PI deficiency has not 
been established.   
• GLASSI A® (alpha1 -proteinase inhibitor [human])   
GLASSIA is an Alpha1 -Proteinase Inhibitor (Human) (Alpha1 -PI) indicated for chronic augmentation and maintenance 
therapy in adults with clinically evident emphysema due to severe hereditary deficiency of Alpha1- PI (a lpha1-
antitrypsin deficiency). GLASSIA increases antigenic and functional (anti -neutrophil elastase capacity, ANEC) serum 
levels and antigenic lung epithelial lining fluid levels of Alpha1- PI.    
  
 Alpha 1-Proteinase Inhibitors  
  
2     GLASSIA is not indicated as therapy for lung disease in patients in whom severe Alpha1- PI deficiency has not been  
established.   
• PROLASTIN -C® (alpha1 -proteinase inhibitor [human])   
PROLASTIN -C is an Alpha1- Proteinase Inhibitor (Human) (Alpha1 -PI) indicated for chronic augmentation and 
maintenance therapy in adults with clinically evident emphysema due to severe hereditary deficiency of Alpha1- PI 
(alpha1 -antitrypsin deficiency). PROLASTIN -C increases antigenic and functional (anti -neutrophil elastase capacity, 
ANEC) serum levels and antigenic lung epithelial l ining fluid levels of Alpha1 -PI. 
PROLASTIN -C is not indicated as therapy for lung disease in patients in whom severe Alpha1- PI deficiency has not 
been established.   
• ZEMAIRA® (alpha1 -proteinase inhibitor [human])   
ZEMAIRA is an alpha1- proteinase inhibitor ( A1-PI) indicated for chronic augmentation and maintenance therapy in 
adults with A1- PI deficiency and clinical evidence of emphysema.   
ZEMAIRA is not indicated as therapy for lung disease patients in whom severe A1- PI deficiency has not been 
established.   
 
Clinical Guideline Coverage Criteria  
 
The Plan may cover  alpha1 -proteinase inhibitor augmentation therapy for Members when All of the following clinical criteria 
are met:   
1. The Member is 18 years of age or older   
AND   
2. The Member has a documented diagnosis of congenital alpha1- antitrypsin deficiency confirmed by one of the 
following:   
a. Pi*ZZ, Pi*Z(null) or Pi*(null)(null) protein phenotypes (homozygous)   
OR  
b. Other rare AAT deficiency disease -causing alleles associated with serum alpha1- antitrypsin ( AAT) level 
<11 µmol/L [35% of normal]   
AND   
3. Pretreatment circulating serum concentration of alpha1- antitrypsin (AAT) level <11 µmol/L (which corresponds to 
<80 mg/dl if measured by radial immunodiffusion or <57 mg/dl if measured by nephelometry)   
AND   
4. The Member has obstructive lung disease as defined by    
a. A forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of 30– 65% of predicted value prior to initiation of therapy   
OR  
b. The Members FEV1 has declined by > 100mL per year   
 
Limitations  
• Samples, free goods, or similar offerings of the requested medication do not qualify for an established clinical 
response and will not be considered for prior authorization  
• The plan does not cover augmentation therapy for other conditions whic h are not listed above in FDA -Approved 
Indications    
 
Codes  
The following code(s) require prior authorization:  
 
Table 1: HCPCS Codes  
HCPCS Codes  Description  
J0256  Injection, alpha 1 -proteinase inhibitor, human, 10 mg, not otherwise specified     
J0257  Injection, alpha 1 proteinase inhibitor (human), (Glassia), 10 mg   
 
References:  
1. Aralast NP [package insert]. Westlake Village, CA: Baxalta US Inc.; December 2018.   
2. Glassia [package insert]. Westlake Village, CA: Baxalta US Inc.; June 2017.     
  
 Alpha 1-Proteinase Inhibitors  
  
3     3. Prolastin -C [package insert]. Research Triangle Park, NC: Grifols Therapeutics Inc.; May 2020.   
4. Zemaira [package insert]. Kankakee, IL: CSL Behring LLC; April 2019.   
5. American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society statement: standards for the diagno sis and 
management of individuals with alpha- 1 antitrypsin deficiency. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003;168:818- 900.  
6. Sandhaus RA, Turino G, Brantly ML, et al. The diagnosis and management of alpha -1 antitrypsin deficiency in the 
adult. Chronic Obstr Pulm D is. 2016;3(3):668 -82.  
7. Stoller JK. Treatment of alpha- 1 antitrypsin deficiency. UpToDate. November 4, 2021. Accessed online April 4, 
2022.   
 
Approval And Revision History 
September 13, 2022: Reviewed by Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee (P&T) . 
September 21, 2022, year: Reviewed by the Medical Policy Approval Committee (MPAC) . 
 
Background, Product and Disclaimer Information 
Medical Necessity Guidelines are developed to determine coverage for benefits and are published to provide a better 
understanding of the basis upon which coverage decisions are made. We make coverage decisions using these guidelines, 
along with the Member’ s benefit document, and in coordination with the Member’s physician(s) on a case- by-case basis 
considering the individual Member's health care needs.  
Medical Necessity Guidelines are developed for selected therapeutic or diagnostic services found to be safe and proven 
effective in a limited, defined population of patients or clinical circumstances. They include concise clinical coverage crit eria 
based on current literature review, consultation with practicing physicians in our service area who are medical experts in 
the particular field, FDA and other government agency policies, and standards adopted by national accreditation organizations. We revise and update Medical Necessity Guidelines annually, or more frequently if new evidence becomes 
available that suggests needed revisions.  
For self -insured plans, coverage may vary depending on the terms of the benefit document. If a discrepancy exists between 
a Medical Necessity Guideline and a self -insured Member’s benefit document, the provisions of the benefit document will 
govern. For Tufts Health Together (Medicaid), coverage may be available beyond these guidelines for pediatric members 
under age 21 under the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) benefits of the plan in accordance 
with 130 CMR 450.140 and 130 CMR 447.000, and with prior authorization.  
Treating providers are solely responsible for the medical advice and treatment of Members. The use of this guideline is not 
a guarantee of payment or a final prediction of how specific cl aim(s) will be adjudicated. Claims payment is subject to 
eligibility and benefits on the date of service, coordination of benefits, referral/authorization, utilization management guidelines when applicable, and adherence to plan policies, plan procedures, and claims editing logic.  