 
Page 1 of 5  
Clinical Policy: Allogeneic Cultured Keratinocytes and Dermal Fibroblasts in 
Murine Collagen -dsat (Strata Graft) 
Reference Number: CP.PHAR. 562 
Effective Date: 03.01.22 
Last Review Date: 02.23  
Line of Business:  Commercial, HIM, Medicaid   
 
Coding Implications  
Revision Log  
 
See Important Reminder  at the end of this policy for important regulatory and legal 
information.  
 D
escription  
Allogeneic cultured keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts in murine collagen- dsat ( StrataG raft®) 
is an allogeneic cellularized scaffold product. 
 FDA Approved I ndication (s) 
StrataGraft  is indicated  for the treatment of adults with thermal burns containing intact dermal 
elements for which surgical intervention is clinically indicated  (deep partial-thickness burns). 
 Policy/Criteria  
Provider must submit documentation (such as office chart notes, lab results or other clinical information) supporting that member has met all approval criteria.   It is the policy of h ealth plans affiliated with  Centene Corporation
® that StrataGraft is  medically 
necessary  when the following criteria are met:  
 I. Initial Approval Criteria  A. Thermal Burns  (must meet all) :  
1. Diagnosis of deep partial -thickness thermal burns containing intact dermal elements ; 
2. Prescribed by or in consultation with a burn specialist;  
3. Age ≥ 18 years ;  
4. Prescriber attestation that surgical intervention is clinically indicated ; 
5. Member is not allergic to products of bovine or porcine origin;  
6. Request meets both of the following (a and b) : 
a. Requested number of StrataGraft constructs does not exceed the size of the wound 
bed (number of constructs may be rounded  up to the nearest whole number ); 
b. Request is for a one- time application only. 
Approval duration: 3 months  ( one time application only)  
 
B. Other diagnoses/indications  (must meet 1 or 2) : 
1. If this drug has recently (within the last 6 months) undergone a label change (e.g., 
newly approved indication, age expansion, new dosing regimen) that is not yet 
reflected in this policy, refer to one of the following policies (a or b): 
a. For drugs on the form ulary  (commercial, health insurance marketplace) or PDL 
(Medicaid) , the no coverage criteria policy for the relevant line of business: 
CP.CPA.190 for commercial, HIM.PA.33 for health insurance marketplace, and 
CP.PMN.255 for Medicaid; or CLINICAL POLICY  
Allogeneic Cultured Keratinocytes and Dermal Fibroblasts in  
Murine Collagen- dsat 
 
Page 2 of 5  
b. For drugs NOT on t he formulary  (commercial, health insurance marketplace ) or 
PDL (Medicaid) , the non-formulary policy for the relevant line of business: 
CP.CPA.190 for commercial, HIM.PA.103 for health insurance marketplace, and 
CP.PMN.16 for Medicaid; or 
2. If the requested use (e.g., diagnosis, age, dosing regimen) is NOT specifically listed 
under section III (Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized) AND 
criterion 1 above does not apply, r efer to the off -label use policy for the relevant line 
of business: CP.CPA.09 for commercial, HIM.PA.154 for health insurance 
marketplace, and CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid.  
 
II. C
ontinued Therapy  
A. Thermal Burns   
1. Re-authorization is not permitted. Members must meet the initial approval criteria.  
Approval duration: Not appli cable  
 
B. Other diagnoses/indications (must meet 1 or 2) : 
1. If this drug has recently (within the last 6 months) undergone a label change (e.g., 
newly approved indication, age expansion, new dosing regimen) that is not yet 
reflected in this policy, refer to one of the following policies (a or b): 
a. For drugs on the form ulary  (commercial, health insurance marketplace) or PDL 
(Medicaid) , the no coverage criteria policy for the relevant line of business: 
CP.CPA.190 for commercial, HIM.PA.33 for health insurance marketplace, and 
CP.PMN.255 for Medicaid; or 
b. For drugs NOT on t he formulary  (commercial, health insurance marketplace ) or 
PDL (Medicaid) , the non-formulary policy for the relevant line of business: 
CP.CPA.190 for commercial, HIM.PA.103 for health insurance marketplace, and 
CP.PMN.16 for Medicaid; or 
2. If the requested u se (e.g., diagnosis, age, dosing regimen) is NOT specifically listed 
under section III (Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized) AND 
criterion 1 above does not apply, r efer to the off -label use policy for the relevant line 
of business : CP.CPA.09 for commercial, HIM.PA.154 for health insurance 
marketplace, and CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid.   
III. D 
iagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized:  
A. Non-FDA  approved indications, which are not addressed in this policy, unless there is 
sufficient documentation of efficacy and safety according to the off label use policies –CP.CPA.09 for commercial, HIM.PA.154 for health insur ance marketplace , and 
CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid or  evidence of coverage documents .  
 
IV. Appendices/General Information  
Appendix A: Abbreviation/Acronym  Key 
FDA: Food and Drug Administration 
 
Appendix B: Therapeutic Alternatives  Not applicable
 CLINICAL POLICY  
Allogeneic Cultured Keratinocytes and Dermal Fibroblasts in  
Murine Collagen- dsat 
 
Page 3 of 5  
 
Appendix C: Contraindications/Boxed Warnings 
• Contraindication(s): known allergies to murine collagen or products containing 
ingredients of bovine or porcine origin 
• Boxed warning(s): none reported  
 
Appendix D: General Information 
• Deep partial -thickness burns are complex skin injuries in which the damage extends 
through the entire epidermis (outermost layer of skin) and into the lower part of the 
dermis (innermost layer of skin).  
 V. Dosage and A dministration   
Indication  Dosing Regimen  Maximum Dose  
Thermal 
burns Apply topically to a surgically prepare d wound bed. 
The number of StrataGraft constructs applied will vary depending on the size of the wound bed. StrataGraft constructs may be trimmed to accommodate the size and shape of the wound bed. It is not necessary to 
overlap the edges . Each StrataGraft  construct is for 
application to a single patient only  Not applicable  
 VI. Product Availability   
StrataGraft construct: o ff-white rectangular sheet of approximately 100 cm
2 (approximately 8 
cm by 12.5 cm), consisting of a viable, bioengineered, allogeneic cellularized scaffold product derived from keratinocytes grown on gelled collagen containing dermal fibroblasts 
 
VII. References  
1. StrataGraft Prescribing Information. Madison, WI: Stratatech Corporation; June 2021. Available at: www.stratagraft.com . Accessed October 27, 2022. 
2. Gibson ALF, Holmes JH, Shupp JW, et al. A phase 3, open-label, controlled, randomized, multicenter trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of StrataGraft construct in patients with deep  partial -thickness thermal burns. Burns. 2021; 47: 1024-1037. 
3. Holmes JH, Schurr MJ, King BT, et al. An open-label, prospective, randomized, controlled, multicenter, phase 1b study of StrataGraft skin tissue versus autografting in patients with deep  partial -thickness thermal burns. Burns. 2019; 45: 1749-1758. 
 Coding Implications  
Codes referenced in this clinical policy are for informational purposes only.  Inclusion or exclusion of any codes does not guarantee coverage.  Providers should reference the most up- to-
date sources of professional coding guidance prior to the submission of claims for reimburs ement of covered services.  
HCPCS 
Codes  Description  
Q4100   Skin substitute, not otherwise specified  
 CLINICAL POLICY  
Allogeneic Cultured Keratinocytes and Dermal Fibroblasts in  
Murine Collagen- dsat 
 
Page 4 of 5  
Reviews, Revisions, and Approvals  Date  P&T 
Approval 
Date  
Policy created  11.04.21  02.22  
Template changes applied to other diagnoses/indications.  10.06.22   
1Q 2023 annual review: no significant changes; updated HCPCS 
code; references reviewed and updated.  10.27.22  02.23  
 
Important R eminder 
This clinical polic y has been developed by appropriately experienced and licensed health care 
professionals based on a review and consideration of currently available generally accepted 
standards of medical practice; peer -reviewed medical literature; government agency/program 
approval status; evidence-based guidelines and positions of leading national health professional organizations; views of physicians practicing in relevant clinical areas affected by this clinical policy; and other available clinical information. The Health Plan  makes no representations and 
accepts no liability with respect to the content of any external information used or relied upon in developing this clinical policy. This clinical policy is consistent with standards of medical practice current at the time that this clinical policy was approved. “Health Plan” means a health plan that has adopted this clinical policy and that is operated or administered, in whole or in part, by Centene Management Company, LLC, or any of such health plan’s affiliates, as applicable.  
 The purpose of this clinical policy is to provide a guide to medical necessity, which is a component of the guidelines used to assist in making coverage decisions and administering benefits. It does not constitute a contract or guarantee regarding payment or results. Coverage decisions and the administration of benefits are subject to all terms, conditions, exclusions and limitations of the coverage documents (e.g., evidence of coverage, certificate of coverage, policy, contract of insurance, etc .), as well as to state and federal requirements and applicable Health 
Plan-level administrative policies and procedures. 
 This clinical policy is effective as of the date determined by the Health Plan. The date of posting may not be the effective date of this clinical policy. This clinical policy may be subject to applicable legal and regulatory requirements relating to provider notification. If there is a discrepancy between the effective date of this clinical policy and any applicable legal or regulatory requirement, the requirements of law and regulation shall govern. The Health Plan retains the right to change, amend or withdraw this clinical policy, and additional clinical policies may be developed and adopted as needed, at any time.  This clinical policy does not constitute medical advice, medical treatment or medical care.  It is not intended to dictate to providers how to practice medicine. Providers are expected to exercise professional medical judgment in providing the most appropriate care, and are solely responsible for the medical advice and treatment of members.  This clinical policy is not intended to recommend treatment for members. Members should consult with their treating physician in connection with diagnosis and treatment decisions.   CLINICAL POLICY  
Allogeneic Cultured Keratinocytes and Dermal Fibroblasts in  
Murine Collagen- dsat 
 
Page 5 of 5  
Providers referred to in this clinical policy are independent contractors who exercise independent 
judgment and over whom the Health Plan has no control or right of control.  Providers are not 
agents or employees of the Health Plan.  
 This clinical policy is the property of the Health Plan . Unauthorized copying, use, and 
distribution of this clinical policy or any information contained herein are strictly prohibited.  Providers, members and their representatives are bound to the terms and conditions expressed herein through the terms of their contracts.  Where no such contract exists, providers, members and their representatives agree to be bound by such terms and conditions by providing services to members and/or submitting claims for payment for such services.  
 Note:  
For Medicaid members , when state Medicaid coverage provisions conflict with the coverage 
provisions in this clinical policy, state Medicaid coverage provisions take precedence. Please refer to the state Medicaid manual for any coverage provisions pertaining to this clinical policy.  
 ©2022 Centene Corporation. All  rights reserved.  All materials are exclusively owned by 
Centene Corporation and are protected by United States copyright law and international copyright law.  No part of this publication may be reproduced, copied, modified, distributed, displayed, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted in any form or by any means, or otherwise published without the prior written permission of Centene Corporation. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice contained herein. Centene
® and Centene  
Corporation® are registered trademarks exclusively owned by Centene Corporation. 