 
 
Page 1 of 4  
Coverage Policy  Number : IP0329  Drug and Biologic Coverage Policy    
   
 
Effective  Date     ................................ ............  4/1/2023  
Next Review Date…  ..................................... 4/1/2024  
Coverage Policy Number  ............................... IP0329  
 
Abaloparatide   
Table of Contents  
 
Overview  ................................ ..............................  1 
Initial Approval Criteria  ................................ .........  1 
Continuation of Therapy  ................................ ...... 3 
Authorization Duration  ................................ .........  3 
Conditions Not Covered  ................................ ....... 3 
Background  ................................ ..........................  4 
References  ................................ ..........................  4 Related Coverage Resources  
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE  
The following Coverage Policy applies to health benefit plans administered by Cigna Companies. Certain Cigna Companies and/or  lines of 
business only provide utilization review services to clients and do not make coverage determinations. References to standard benefit plan language and coverage determinations do not apply to those clients. Coverage Policies are intended to provide guidanc e in interpreting 
certain standard benefit plans administered by Cigna Companies. Please note, the terms of a customer’s particular benefit plan document [Group Service Agreement, Evidence of Coverage, Certificate of Coverage, Summary Plan Description (SPD) or similar plan document] may 
differ significantly from the standard benefit plans upon which these Coverage Policies are based. For example, a customer’s benefit plan 
document may contain a specific exclusion related to a topic addressed in a Coverage P olicy. In the event of a conflict, a customer’s benefit 
plan document always supersedes the information in the Coverage Policies. In the absence of a controlling federal or state coverage 
mandate, benefits are ultimately determined by the terms of the appl icable benefit plan document. Coverage determinations in each specific 
instance require consideration of 1) the terms of the applicable benefit plan document in effect on the date of service; 2) any applicable 
laws/regulations; 3) any relevant collateral s ource materials including Coverage Policies and; 4) the specific facts of the particular situation. 
Coverage Policies relate exclusively to the administration of health benefit plans. Coverage Policies are not recommendations  for treatment 
and should never  be used as treatment guidelines. In certain markets, delegated vendor guidelines may be used to support medical 
necessity and other coverage determinations.  
Overview  
 
This policy supports medical necessity review for  abaloparatide subcuta neous injection (Tymlos®). 
 
Receipt of sample product does not satisfy any criteria requirements for coverage.  
 
Initial Approval  Criteria  
 
Abaloparatide ( Tymlos)  is considered medically necessary for the treatment of postmenopausal 
women with osteoporosis  when the individual meets ALL of  the following criteria:   
 1. Meets ONE  of the following conditions:  
a. Has had a bone mineral density (BMD) T -score (current or at any  time in the past) at or below     
-2.5 at the lumbar spine, femoral neck, total hip and/or 33%  (one- third) radius (wrist)  
b. Has had an osteoporotic fracture or a fragility fracture 
c. BOTH  of the following:  
 
 
Page 2 of 4  
Coverage Policy  Number : IP0329  i. Has low bone mass  (for example, a T -score [cur rent or at any time in the past]  between 
-1.0 and -2.5 at the lumbar spine, femor al neck, total hip, and/or 33% [one third] radius 
[wrist])  
ii. Prescriber determines that the individual is at high risk for fracture ( for example, the 
FRAX® [fracture risk assessment tool]  10-year probability for major osteoporotic fracture 
is at least 20% or the 10- year probabil ity of hip fracture is at least 3%)  
2. Documentation of ONE  of the following:  
a. Failure or inadequate response to at least ONE  of the following oral or intravenous 
bisphosphonate products  (examples of failure/inadequate response include, osteoporotic or 
fragility fracture while receiving bisphosphonate therapy, ongoing and significant loss of BMD, or 
lack of a BMD increase ): 
i. alendronate tablets or oral solution (Fosamax)  
ii. ibandronate intravenous injection or tablets (Boniva)  
iii. risedronate tablets/delayed release tablets (Actonel/Atelvia)  
iv. zoledronic acid intravenous infusion (Reclast)  
b. Has a contraindication or intolerance to BOTH  oral and intravenous bisphosphonate therapy  
c. Is at very high risk for fracture (examples include, recent fracture within past 12 months, 
fractures while on approved osteoporosis therapy, multiple fractures, fractures while on drugs 
causing skeletal harm [e.g., long- term glucocorticoids], very low T -score [e.g., less than − 3.0], 
high risk for falls or history of injurious falls, and v ery high fracture probability by FRAX® [fracture 
risk assessment tool] [e.g., major osteoporosis fracture greater than 30%, hip fracture greater than 4.5%])  
3. Will not exceed a total of 24 months of therapy [including previous use of teriparatide (Forteo
®)] 
An exception can be made for those individuals who remain at or have returned to having a high risk of fracture. Examples of high risk for fracture include, a previous osteoporotic fracture or fragility fracture, 
receipt of medications that increase the r isk of osteoporosis, advanced age, or a very low bone mineral 
density.  
 
 
 
Abaloparatide ( Tymlos) is considered medica lly necessary for the treatment to increase bone density 
in men with osteoporosis when the individual meets ALL of the following criteria:  
 1. Meets ONE  of the following conditions:  
a. Has had a bone mineral density (BMD) T -score (current or at any time in the past) at or below     
-2.5 at the lumbar spine, femoral neck, total hip and/or 33% (one -third) radius (wrist)  
b. Has had an osteoporotic fracture or a fragility fracture 
c. BOTH  of the following:  
i. Has low bone mass (for example, a T -score [current or at any time in the past] between 
-1.0 and -2.5 at the lumbar spine, femoral neck, total hip, and/or 33% [one third] radius 
[wrist])  
ii. Prescriber determines that the individual is at high risk for fracture (for example, the 
FRAX
® [fracture risk assessment tool] 10- year probability for major osteoporotic fracture 
is at least 20% or the 10- year probability of hip fracture is at least 3%)  
2. Documentation of ONE  of the following:  
a. Failure or inadequate response to at least ONE  of the following oral or intravenous 
bisphosphonate products (examples of  failure/inadequate response include, osteoporotic or 
fragility fracture while receiving bisphosphonate therapy, ongoing and significant loss of BMD, or 
lack of a BMD increase):  
i. alendronate tablets or oral solution (Fosamax)  
ii. ibandronate intravenous inject ion or tablets (Boniva)  
iii. risedronate tablets/delayed release tablets (Actonel/Atelvia)  
iv. zoledronic acid intravenous infusion (Reclast)  
b. Has a contraindication or intolerance to BOTH  oral and intravenous bisphosphonate therapy  
c. Is at very high risk for fractur e (examples include, recent fracture within past 12 months, 
fractures while on approved osteoporosis therapy, multiple fractures, fractures while on drugs  
 
Page 3 of 4  
Coverage Policy  Number : IP0329  causing skeletal harm [e.g., long- term glucocorticoids], very low T -score [e.g., less than − 3.0], 
high risk for falls or history of injurious falls, and very high fracture probability by FRAX® [fracture 
risk assessment tool] [e.g., major osteoporosis fracture greater than 30%, hip fracture greater 
than 4.5%])  
3. Will not exceed a total of 24 months of ther apy [including previous use of teriparatide (Forteo®)] 
An exception can be made for those individuals who remain at or have returned to having a high risk of 
fracture. Examples of high risk for fracture include, a previous osteoporotic fracture or fragility fracture, 
receipt of medications that increase the risk of osteoporosis, advanced age, or a very low bone mineral 
density.  
 
 
 
When coverage is available and medically necessary, the dosage, frequency, duration of therapy, and site of 
care should be reasonable, clinically appropriate, and supported by evidence- based literature and adjusted 
based upon severity, alternative available treatments, and previous response to therapy.  
 
Continuation of Therapy  
 
Continuation of abaloparatide (Tymlos) beyond 24 months is considered medically necessary for ALL covered 
diagnoses when initial criteria are met AND there is documentation that the individual remains at or has returned 
to a high risk for fracture and the prescriber has determined the potential benefit of continued therapy outweighs 
the risk.  
 Examples of high risk for fracture include a previous osteoporotic fracture or fragility fracture, receipt of  
medications that increase the risk of osteoporosis, adv anced age, or a very low bone mineral density.  
 
Authorization Duration  
 Initial approval  duration:  up to 24 months   
 The initial  approval duration should not exceed the necessary duration to complete a total of 24 months of 
therapy with parathyroid hormone analogs  (abaloparatide [Tymlos]  or teriparatide [ Forteo] ). 
 Reauthorization approval duration:  up to 12 months  
 
Conditions Not Covered  
 Any other use is considered experimental, investigational or unproven,  including the following (this list may not 
be all inclusive):   
 
1. Concurrent Use with Othe r Medications for Osteoporosis.  Examples of medications for osteoporosis 
that Tymlos should not be given with include Prolia (denosumab subcutaneous injection), oral 
bisphosphonates (alendronate, risedronat e, ibandronate), intravenous bisphosphonates (zoledronic acid 
intravenous infusion [Reclast], ibandronate intravenous injection), calcitonin nasal spray 
(Miacalcin/Fortical), teriparatide subcutaneous injection (Forteo), and Evenity (romosozumab- aqqg 
subcu taneous injection).  However, this does NOT exclude use of calcium and/or vitamin D supplements 
in combination with Tymlos.  
 
2. Osteoporosis Prevention.   Tymlos has not been studied in this patient population. The benefits and 
risks of building bone with Tymlos in a condition in which substantial bone loss has not occurred have 
not been investigated.
1 
   
 
Page 4 of 4  
Coverage Policy  Number : IP0329   
Background  
 OVERVIEW  
Tymlos, a human parathyroid hormone related peptide analog, is indicated for the following uses:
1 
• Osteoporosis, treatment of postmenopausal women, at high risk for fracture.  
• Osteoporosis, treatment to increase bone density in men , at high risk for fracture.  
 
Patients at high risk for fracture are defined as those with a history of osteoporotic fracture, have multiple risk 
factor s for fracture, or have failed or are intolerant to other osteoporosis therapy.  
 Guidelines  
Guidelines for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women from the Endocrine Society (2019)
2 as well as from the 
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American College of Endocrinology (2020)3 discuss 
Tymlos.  In general, Tymlos is one of several alternatives recommended in patients who are at high risk of fracture or in those unable to utilize oral bisphosphonate therapy.  The Bone Health and Osteoporosis clinician guide to prevent and treat osteoporosis (2022) cites robust reductions in vertebral and non- vertebral fractures 
with Tymlos therapy in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.
4 
 Safety  
The prescribing information for Tymlos states that the saf ety and efficacy of Tymlos have not been evaluated 
beyond 2 years of therapy.  Use of the medication for more than 2 year during a patient’s lifetime is not 
recommended.  There are limited data evaluating the risk of osteosarcoma beyond 2 years of Tymlos and/or use 
of a parathyroid hormone analog.  Avoid use of Tymlos in patients who are at increased baseline risk of osteosarcoma (e.g., open epiphyses [pediatric and young adult patients], those with metabolic bone disease, 
patients with bone metastases or a history of skeletal malignancies).  
 
References 
 
1. Tymlos® subcutaneous injection [prescribing information].  Boston, MA:  Radius; December 2022.  
2. Eastell R, Rosen CJ, Black DM, et al.  Pharmacological management of osteoporosis in postmenopausal 
women:  an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab.  2019;104(5):1595- 1622.  
3. Camacho PM, Petak SM, Binkley N, et al.  America n Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American 
College of Endocrinology clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis -2020 update.  Endocrin Pract .  2020;26(Suppl 1):1 -46. 
4. LeBoff MS, GreenspanSL, Insog na KL, et al.  The clinician’s guide to prevention and treatment of 
osteoporosis.  Osteoporosis Int .  2022;33(10):2049- 2102.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
“Cigna Companies” refers to operating subsidiaries of Cigna Corporation. All products and services are provided exclusively by or through 
such operating subsidiaries, including Cigna Health and Life Insurance Company, Connecticut General Life Insurance Company, E vernorth 
Behavioral Health, Inc., Cigna Health Management, Inc., and HMO or service company subsidiaries  of Cigna Health Corporation. © 2023 
Cigna. 