DR.007. B – Adakve o®(Crizanlizumab -tcma)    page 1 DR.007. B Adakveo® (Crizanlizumab- tcma)  
Title:  Adakveo®(Crizanlizumab- tcma)  
Policy #: DR.007. B 
Type:  Medical  
Sub-Type:  Drug (DR)  Original Implementation Date:  8/1/2020 
Version Date [ B]: 1/1/2021  
Last Review Date:  2/16/2022  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Product Variations  …………………………1  
FDA Approved Indictations  ……………1  
Policy Statement  ………………………… …1 
Prior Authorization Criteria  ……………1  
Dosage and Administration …………..2  Risk Factors/Side Effects  …………………. 2 
Monitoring  .…………………………………….3  
Policy Guidelines  .……………………………3  
Coding  ..…………………………………………..3  
Background ..….……………………………….4  Clinical Trial Evidence  ..…………………… 4 
Disclaimer  .……………………………………..5  
Policy History  .…………………………………5  
References  …..……… .……………………….. 5 
 
PRODUCT VARIATIONS  
This policy only applies to Health Partners Plans (HPP) Medicare product line.  
FDA APPROVED INDICATIONS  
Adakveo® is a monoclonal antibody used to reduce the frequency of vasoocclusive crises in adult and pediatric patients 
16 years or older with sickle cell disease.  
POLICY STATEMENT  
 
Health Partners Plans (HPP) considers Adakveo ®(Crizanlizumab -tcma) medically necessary  to reduce the frequency of 
vasoocclusive crises in adult and pediatric patients 16 years or older  with sickle cell disease.  
PRIOR AUTHORIZATION CRITERIA  
INITIAL CRITERIA  
AUTHORIZATION DURATI ON: IF ALL CRITERIA MET , APPROVE FOR 6 MONT HS 
1) Adults 16  years of age and older;  AND  
2) Medication is being prescribed by or in consultation with a specialist (i.e.hematolagist); AND  
DR.007. B – Adakve o®(Crizanlizumab -tcma)    page 2 3) Patients with documented diagnosis of a sickle cell disease (homozygous hemoglobin S [HbSS], sickle 
hemoglobin C disease [HbSC], sickle β0 -thalassemia [HbSβ0 -thalassemia], sickle β+ -thalassemia [HbSβ+ -
thalassemia], or other genotypes); AND  
I. Patient has experienced at least two sickle cell -related pain crises in the prior year  
4) If patient is female and of childbearing potential, has documentation of recent negative pregnancy test; AND  
5) Patient has had previous treatment, intolerance, or contraindication with hydroxyurea, or is taking 
concomitantly with Adakveo ®; AND  
6) Patient is not receiving concomitant chronic, prophylactic blood transfusion therapy; AND  
7) Patient is not receiving concomitant Oxybryta (voxelotor) therapy; AND  
8) Adakveo ® initial dosing is in accorda nce with the United States Food and Drug Administration approved 
labeling: 5 mg/kg by intravenous infusion on week 0, week 2 and every 4 weeks thereafter  
9) Please note: For members who are new to the plan and are already treated and stable with Adakveo ® 
(records must be attached), the medication will be approved for continuation of treatment . 
 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION  
 
DOSING RECOMMENDATIONS  
 Recommended  administration of Adakveo ® 5mg/kg by intravenous infusion over a period of 30 minutes at Week 
0, Week 2, and every 4 weeks thereafter.  
 If a dose is missed, administer Adakveo ® as soon as possible. If Adakveo ® is administered within 2 weeks after 
the missed dose, continue original dosing schedule.  
 Adakveo ® may be given with or without hydroxyurea.  
 Recommended to dilute Adakveo ® in 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection, USP or 5% Dextrose Injection, USP to a 
total volume of 100 mL for intravenous infusion.  
 Administer Adakveo ® diluted soluti on by intravenous infusion over a period of 30 minutes, do not mix or co -
administer with other drugs through the same intravenous line.  
This information is not meant to replace clinical decision making when initiating or modifying medication therapy and 
should only be used as a guide. Patient -specific variables should be taken into account.  
RISK FACTORS/SIDE EFFECTS   
 
Infusion Reactions:  
Infusion- related reactions (occurring within 24 hours of infusion) have been reported. Symptoms may include fever, 
chills, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, dizziness, pruritus, urticaria, sweating, dyspnea, or wheezing. Monitor patients for signs and symptoms of infusion- related reactions. Discontinue Adakveo ® infusion for severe reactions and manage as clinically 
necessary.  
Pregnancy:  
Adakveo ® has the potential to cause fetal harm when administered to pregnant women. Adakveo ® should only be used 
during pregnancy if the expected benefit to the patient justifies the potential risk to the fetus .  DR.007. B – Adakve o®(Crizanlizumab -tcma)    page 3 Adverse Reactions:  
The most comm on adverse reactions (≥ 10%) were nausea, arthralgia, back pain, and pyrexia.  
MONITORING  
• During therapy: Infusion reactions.  
POLICY GUIDELINES  
N/A 
CODING  
The Current Procedural Terminology (CPT®), Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS), and ICD -10 
codes that may be listed in this policy are for reference purposes only. Listing of a code in this policy does not imply 
that the service is covered and is not a guarantee of payment. Other policies and coverage guidelines may apply. 
When reporting services, providers/facilities should code to the highest level of specificity using the code that was in 
effect on the date the service was rendered. This list may not be all inclusive.  
CPT Code  Description  
N/A N/A 
 
CPT® is a registered trademark of the American Medical Association.  
HCPCS Code  Description  
J0791 Injection, crizanlizumab- tmca, 5 mg  
 
ICD-10 Code  Description  
D57.00 Hb-SS disease with crisis, unspecified  
 
D57.001 Hb-SS disease with acute chest syndrome  
 
D57.002 Hb-SS disease with splenic  
 
D57.1 Sickle -cell disease without crisis  
 
D57.20 Sickle -cell/Hb -C disease without crisis  
 
D57.211 Sickle -cell/Hb -C disease without crisis  
 DR.007. B – Adakve o®(Crizanlizumab -tcma)    page 4  
BACKGROUND  
 
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is an inherited group of disorders characterized by the presence of hemoglobin S (HbS), either 
from homozygosity for the sickle mutation in the beta globin chain of hemoglobin (HbSS) or from compound 
heterozygosity of a sickle beta globin mutation with another beta globin mutation (e .g., sickle -beta thalassemia). The 
hallmarks of SCD are vaso -occlusive phenomena and hemolytic anemia.  
Crizanlizumab -tmca (Adakveo ®) is a  humanized IgG2 kappa monoclonal antibody that was approved by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) in November 2019. It works by binding to P -selectin and blocking interaction with its 
ligands, including P -selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 on the surf ace of activated endothelium and platelets, causing a 
blockage of interactions between endothelial cells, platelets, red blood cells, and leukocytes . 
CLINICAL TRIAL EVIDENCE  
 
The efficacy of crizanlizumab was evaluated in a 52 -week, randomized, placebo -controlled,  double -blind, multicenter, 
phase 2 study of 198 patients with sickle cell disease (SUSTAIN trial;  NCT01895361). Patients included in the trial were 
16 to 65 years of age, had sickle cell disease  (SCD) of any genotype (HbSS, HbSC, HbS/beta0 -thalas semia, HbS/beta+ -
thalassemia, and others)  and a history of 2 to 10 VOCs in the previous 12 months as determined by medical history or by  
patient’s recall (crises included the occurrence of appropriate symptoms, a visit to a specific  medical facility and/or  
healthcare professional, and receipt of pain medication). Patients  undergoing long -term red blood cell transfusion 
therapy or with a hemoglobin level less than 4  g/dL were excluded from the trial. Patients were randomized 1:1:1 to 
receive high -dos crizanl izumab 5 mg/kg (n=67), low -dose crizanlizumab 2.5 mg/kg (n=66), or placebo (n=65) as a  30-
minute intravenous infusion on week 0, week 2, and every 4 weeks thereafter for the duration of 52 -week treatment. 
Patients received crizanlizumab with or without hydroxyurea and were  permitted to receive periodic transfusions and D57.212 Sickle -cell/Hb -C disease with splenic sequestration  
 
D57.219 Sickle -cell/Hb -C disease with splenic unspecified  
 
D57.40 Sickle -cell thalassemia without crisis  
 
D57.411 Sickle -cell thalassemia with acute chest syndrome  
 
D57.412 Sickle -cell thalassemia with splenic sequestration  
 
D57.419 Sickle -cell thalassemia, unspecified  
 
D57.80 Other sickle -cell disorders, without crisis  
 
D57.811 Other sickle -cell disorders with acute chest syndrome  
 
D57.812 Other sickle -cell disorders with splenic sequestration  
 
D57.819 Other sickle -cell disorders, unspecified DR.007. B – Adakve o®(Crizanlizumab -tcma)    page 5 pain medications (i.e., acetaminophen, NSAIDs,  and opioids) as needed. Sixty -two percent (62%) of enrolled patients 
were receiving hydroxyurea  at baseline. Patients receiving hydroxyurea at s tudy entry had to have been taking the drug 
for at  least 6 months and on a stable dose for at least the most recent 3 months. Hydroxyurea could not  be initiated 
during the trial for patients not receiving the drug at study entry. The primary  efficacy endpo int was the annual rate of 
sickle cell- related pain crises (VOCs) leading to a  healthcare visit in the high- dose crizanlizumab group versus placebo. 
SCD patients in the high dose  crizanlizumab group had a statistically significant lower median annual rate of VOC  
compared to patients in the placebo group (1.63 vs. 2.98; p=0.01), indicating a 45.3% lower rate  with high- dose 
crizanlizumab. Reductions in VOC frequency were observed in study participants  regardless of SCD genotype and/or 
hydroxyurea use.  
DISCLAIMER  
 
Approval or denial of payment does not constitute medical advice and is neither intended to guide nor inf luence medical 
decision making.  
POLICY HISTORY  
 
Summary  Version  Version Effective Date  
2022 annual review. No changes.  B 1/1/2021 
Version B. This policy only applies to HPP Medicare LOB. No other 
changes for 2021.  B 1/1/2021 
New Drug Policy.  A 8/1/2020 
 
REFERE NCES 
1. Adakveo® [prescribing information]. East Hanover,  NJ: Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. 2019 November. 
https://www.pharma.us.novartis.com/sites/www.pharma.us.novartis.com/files/adakveo ®.pdf 
2. IPD Analytics. New Drug Review Adakveo ® (crizanlizumab -tcma). 2019.  
3. Brawley OW, Cornelius LJ, Edwards LR, Northington Gamble V, Green BL, Inturrisi C, James A H, Laraque D, 
Mendez M, Montoya CJ, Pollock BH, Robinson L, Scholnik AP, Schori M. National Institutes of Health 
Consensus Development Conference Statement: hydroxyurea treatment for sickle cell disease. Ann Intern 
Med. 2008;148:932- 8. 
4. Creary, Susan E, Str ouse, John J. Hydroxyurea and Transfusion Therapy for the Treatment of Sickle Cell 
Disease. American Society of Hematology 2014.  
5. Truven Health Analytics Micromedex® DrugDex® Compendium. crizanlizumab ( Adakveo ™). Greenwood 
Village, CO. [Micromedex® Solutio ns Web site]. Available at: 
https://www.micromedexsolutions.com/micromedex2/librarian (via subscription only). March 18, 2020.  
6. Disease -modifying therapies for prevention of vaso -occlusive pain in sickle cell disease, Elliot P Vichinsky, MD, 
Up-To-Date Onli ne.  DR.007. B – Adakve o®(Crizanlizumab -tcma)    page 6 7. Crizanlizumab. Up- To-Date Online. Accessed: March 2020.  