    
Lumasiran (Oxlumo)  - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
          
 
 
   
 
 
 
         
          
         
 
       
          
          
 
    
        
          
    
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
    
 Page 1 of 9 
Lumasiran (Oxlumo) 
 
POLICY HISTORY 
Last Review: 12/09/2021 
Effective:  03/19/2021 
Next Review: 12/08/2022 
Review History 
Deﬁnitions 
Additional Information 
Clinical Policy Bulletin  
Notes Number: 0983 
POLICY 
*Please see amendment forPennsylvania Medicaid at theend ofthis 
CPB. 
Note : Requires Precertification. 
Precertification of lumasiran (Oxlumo) is required of all Aetna participating 
providers and members in applicable plan designs. For precertification of 
lumasiran (Oxlumo), call (866) 752 -7021 or fax (888) 267 -3277. 
Note : Site of Care Utilization Management Policy applies. For 
information on site of service for lumasiran (Oxlumo), see Utilization 
Management Policy on Site of Care for Specialty Drug Infusions. 
I. Criteria for Initial Approval 
Aetna considers lumasiran (Oxlumo) medically necessary for the 
treatment of primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1) to lower urinary 
oxalate levels when all of the following criteria are met: 
A. Member has a documented diagnosis of primary hyperoxaluria 
type 1 (PH1) conﬁrmed by a molecular genetic test showing a 
mutation in the alanine: glyoxyla te aminotransferase  (AGXT) 
gene or liver enzyme analysis demonstrating absent or 
signiﬁcantly reduced alanine: glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT) 
activity; and       Lumasiran (Oxlumo) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 2 of 9  
        
           
 
 
  
 
        
 
  
 
 
         
          
    
 
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
   
  
 
   
 
     
 
 
   
 
      
       
    
  
 
 
 
  
 
  B. Member hasapretreatment estimatedglomerular ﬁltration
 
rate (eGFR) of greater than or equal to 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 .
 
II. Aetna considers all other indications as experimental and investigational 
III. Continuation of Therapy 
Aetna considers continuation of lumasiran therapy medically
 
necessary for members who meet all initial authorization criteria 
and the member’s urinary oxalate excretion has decreased or
 normalized since initiation of therapy.
 
Dosage and Administration 
Lumasiran is available as Oxlumo and supplied as 94.5 mg/0.5 mL in a
 single -dose vial. Oxlumo is intended for subcutaneous use and should be 
administered by a healthcare professional.
 
The recommended dose of lumasiran (Oxlumo) by subcutaneous
 
injection is based on body weight.
 
Table:  Oxlumo We ight-Based Dosing  Regimen 
 
Body 
Weight Loading Dose Maintenance Dose (begin 1 month after the last loading dose) 
Less than 10 
kg 6 mg/kg once-
monthly for 3 doses 3 mg/kg once- monthly 
10 to less 
than 20 kg 6 mg/kg once-
monthly for 3 doses 6 mg/kg once every 3 months (quarterly) 
20 kg and 
above 3 mg/kg once-
monthly for 3 doses 3 mg/kg once every 3 months (quarterly) 
Source: Alnylam, 2020 
Background 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) -Approved  Indications  
Lumasiran (Oxlumo) is indicated for the treatment of primary 
hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1) to lower urinary oxalate levels in 
pediatric and adult patients.        
 Lumasiran (Oxlumo) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 3 of 9 
        
         
     
       
        
          
             
       
         
          
       
         
      
 
            
   
 
 
 
      
       
          
         
          
         
         
       
        
           
      
        
        
      
         
       
     
 
          
    
         Lumasiran, a HAO1 -directed small interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA), is 
available as the brand Oxlumo (Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.). Per the 
label for Oxlumo, lumasiran reduces levels of glycolate oxidase (GO) 
enzyme by targeting the hydroxyacid oxidase 1 (HAO1) messenger 
ribonucleic acid (mRNA) in hepatocytes through RNA interference. 
Decreased GO enzyme levels reduce the amount of available glyoxylate, 
a substrate for oxalate production. As the GO enzyme is upstream of the 
deficient alanine: glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT) enzyme that 
causes PH1, the mechanism of action of lumasiran is independent of the underlying AGXT gene mutation. Oxlumo is not expected to be 
effective in primary hyperoxaluria type 2 (PH2) or type 3 (PH3) 
because its mechanism of action does not affect the metabolic pathways causing hyperoxaluria in PH2 and PH3 (Alnylam, 2020). 
The most common adverse reaction (reported in 20% or more of patients) 
is injection site reactions. 
Primary hyper oxaluria type 1 (PH1) 
Primary hyperoxalurias (PHs) are rare inborn errors of glyoxylate metabolism characterized by the over -production of oxalate, which is 
poorly soluble and is deposited as calcium oxalate in various organs (including the bones, eyes, heart, and kidney). Primary hyperoxaluria is caused by mutations in 1 of the 3 genes that encode enzymes involved in 
glyoxylate metabolism. Primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1; about 80 % of 
cases) is due to mutations of hepatic peroxisomal enzyme alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT); it is the most common and severe 
type affecting an estimated 1 to 3 individuals per million in Europe and North America. As oxalate is primarily excreted in the urine, the kidney is 
the prime target for oxalate deposition, which leads to end- stage renal 
disease (ESRD) in many cases. Patients with PH1 produce excessive 
oxalate, which can combine with calcium to cause kidney stones and deposits in the kidneys. Patients can experience progressive kidney damage, which can lead t o kidney failure and the need for dialysis. As 
kidney function worsens, oxalate can build up and damage other organs (Cochat and Rumsby, 2013; Niaudet, 2020). 
Liebow and associates (2017) stated that PH1 arises from mutations in the enzyme AGT; and the resulting deficiency in this enzyme leads to abnormally high oxalate production resulting in calcium oxalate crystal        
Lumasiran (Oxlumo) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 4 of 9 
        
         
         
           
     
       
    
     
         
    
    
     
        
         
               
          
       
         
 
 
  
    
     
      
    
       
            
      
     
       
        
         
      
     
       
         
     
         
   formation and deposition in the kidney and many other organs, with 
systemic oxalosis and ESRD being common outcomes. Although a small 
subset of patients can manage the disease with vitamin B6 treatments, the only effective treatment for most is a combined liver-kidney transplant. 
These researchers discussed the development of ALN -GO1, an 
investigational RNA interference (RNAi) therapeutic targeting glycolate 
oxidase, to deplete the substrate for oxalate synthesis. Subcutaneous
 admi nistration of ALN-GO1 resulted in potent, dose- dependent, and
 
durable silencing of the mRNA encoding glycolate oxidase and increased 
serum glycolate concentrations in wild -type mice, rats, and non- human 
primates. Furthermore, ALN -GO1 increased urinary glycolate
 
concentrations in normal non- human primates and in a genetic mouse 
model of PH1. Notably, ALN-GO1 reduced urinary oxalate concentration 
up to 50 % following a single -dose in the genetic mouse model of PH1,
 
and up to 98 % after multiple doses in a rat model of hyperoxaluria. The
 
authors concluded that these findings showed the ability of ALN-GO1 to 
reduce oxalate production in pre- clinical models of PH1 across multiple 
species and provided a clear rationale for clinical trials with this
 compound.
 
McGregor and colleagues (2020) noted that by sequencing autozygous
 human populations, these researchers identified a healthy adult woman
 with lifelong complete knockout of HAO1 (expected about 1 in 30 million
 outbred people). HAO1 (glycolate oxidase) silencing is the mechanism of
 
lumasiran, an investigational RNAi therapeutic for PH1. Lumasiran acts 
by lowering oxalate production. Her plasma glycolate levels were 12 
times, and urinary glycolate 6 times, the upper limit of normal observed in 
healthy reference individuals (n = 67). Plasma metabolomics and 
lipidomics (1,871 biochemicals) revealed 18 markedly elevated
 biochemicals (greater than 5 standard deviations outliers versus n = 25 
controls) suggesting additional HAO1 effects. Comparison withlumasiran
 
pre-clinical and clinical trial data suggested she had less than 2 %
 
residual glycolate oxidase activity. Cell line p.Leu333SerfsTer4 
expression showed markedly reduced HAO1 protein levels and cellular
 protein mis -localization. The authors concluded that in this patient,
 
lifelong HAO1 knockout is safe and without clinical phenotype, de- risking 
a therapeutic approach and informing therapeutic mechanisms .
 
Unlocking evidence from the diversity of human genetic variation can 
facilitate drug development.
        
Lumasiran (Oxlumo) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 5 of 9 
        
        
       
               
        
       
        
        
       
             
          
           
    
        
              
  
 Lumasiran acts by lowering oxalate production. It was examined in 2 
studies in patients with PH1: a randomized, placebo -controlled trial in 
patients 6 years and older and an open -label study in patients younger 
than 6 years. Patients ranged in age from 4 months to 61 years at the 1st 
dose. In the first study, 26 patients received a monthly injection of 
Oxlumo followed by a maintenance dose every 3 months; 13 patients 
received placebo injections. The primary end -point was the amount of 
oxalate measured in the urine over 24 hours. In the Oxlumo group, 
patients had, on average, a 65 % reduction of oxalate in the urine, 
compared to an average 12 % reduction in the placebo group. By the 6th 
month of the study, 52 % of patients treated with Oxlumo reached a 
normal 24 -hour urinary oxalate level; no patients treated with the placebo 
did. In the 2nd study, 16 patients younger than 6 years all received 
Oxlumo. Using another measure of oxalate in the urine, the study 
showed, on average, a 71 % decrease in urinary oxalate by the 6th month 
of the study. 
On November  23,  2020,  the  Food and Drug Administration  (FDA)  
 
approved Oxlumo  (lumasiran)  as  the  1st  treatment  for  PH1;  Oxlumo  
 
received  orphan drug designation.  The FDA approval  was  based  on the 
positive findings from  2 clinical trials in patients  with PH1 -- the 
ILLUMINATE -A and ILLUMINATE -B phase -III studies. ILLUMINATE -A
  
was  a  randomized (2:1;  drug  to placebo),  double -blind, placebo - 
controlled,  multi -national  study.  It  enrolled  39 patients  with  PH1,  aged 6  
 
and above,  with  relatively  preserved  renal  function (an estimated  
 
glomerular  filtration  rate  [eGFR]  of  greater  than  or  equal  to  30  ml/min/1.73 
m2),  at  16  study  sites,  in  8  countries  around  the  world.  Oxlumo  achieved 
the ILLUMINATE -A primary end -point  of  %  change from  baseline,  
 
relative -to-placebo,  in  24-hour  urinary  oxalate  excretion  averaged  across  
 
months  3  to  6 and  corrected  for  body  surface  area (BSA).  Specifically,  
 
treatment  with  Oxlumo resulted  in  a  65 %  mean reduction in  urinary 
  
oxalate  relative  to  baseline  versus  12  %  reduction  reported  in  response  to 
placebo,  resulting in  a mean  treatment  difference of  53 %  relative  to 
placebo  (p  =  1.7 x  10-14).  At  month 6,  all  tested secondary  end-points 
  
were  met,  including  the proportion  of  patients  treated with  Oxlumo  
 
achieving  at  or  below  the  upper  limit  of  normal *  (13/25  patients  or  52  %;  p
  
=  0.001)  and  at  or  below  1.5  x  upper  limit  of  norma l**  (21/25  patients  or
  
84  %;  p =  8.3 x  10-7) levels of  urinary  oxalate, compared to none  (0/13)  
 
of  the patients  receiving  placebo.  No serious  or  severe  adverse  events  
 
(AEs)  were  reported.  Injection site  reactions  (ISRs)  were  the most  
 
common  drug-related  adverse  reaction,  reported  in  10  out  of  26  (38  %)  of
         
Lumasiran (Oxlumo) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 6 of 9 
       
    
 
        
         
 
 
             
        
 
            
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
    
 
    
   
   
  
   patients receiving Oxlumo. No ISRs were reported in patients receiving 
placebo; and ISRs occurr ed throughout the study period and included 
erythema, pain, pruritus, and swelling. These symptoms were generally
 
mild and resolved within 1 day of the injection and did not lead to
 discontinuation of treatment.
 
* Normalization was defined as urinary oxalate levels of less than or equal
 
to upper limit of normal (0.514 mmol/24 hour/1.73 m )
 
2
** Near -normalization was defined as urinary oxalate levels of less than or
 
equal to 1.5 x the upper limit of normal (0.771 mmol/24 hour/1.73 m )
 2
ILLUMINATE -B was  an  open-label, single- arm, multi -national  pediatric  
 
study.  The  approval  was  based  on  an  interim  analysis,  which  included  16 
of  18  PH1  patients  enrolled  in  the  study;  patients  were  under  the  age  of  6 
with  an  eGFR  of  greater  than or  equal  to  45 ml/min/1.73 m2 or  normal
  
serum  creatinine,  if  less  than  12  months  old.  The  primary  end-point  of  the 
study  was  the  %  change from  baseline  to  month 6  in  spot  urinary
  
oxalate:  creatinine  ratio averaged across  mont hs  3 to 6.  In the interim  
 
analysis  (n  =  16),  patients  treated  with  Oxlumo  attained  a  71  %  mean
  
reduction in spot  urinary  oxalate:  creatinine  ratio from  baseline (95 %  
CI:  65 to 77)  . In the 6 -month  primary  analysis  (n  =  18),  patients  treated  
 
with  Oxlumo  attained  a  72  %  mean  reduction  in  spot  urinary  oxalate:
  
creatinine  ratio  from  baseline.  The  overall safety  and  tolerability  profile  
 
of  Oxlumo w as  consistent  with  that  observed  in  the  ILLUMINATE -A
  
pivotal  study.
  
CPT Codes/ HCPCS Codes/ICD- 10 Codes
 
Information in the [brackets] below  has been added for clarification 
purposes. Codes requiring  a 7th character are represented by “+”
  
Code Code Description 
Other CPT codes related to the CPB : 
96372 Therapeutic, prophylactic, or diagnostic injection (specify
 
substance or drug); subcutaneous or intramuscular
 
HCPCS codes covered if selection criteria are met : 
J0224 Injection, lumasiran, 0.5 mg 
ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met : 
E72.53 Primary hyperoxaluria        
 Lumasiran (Oxlumo) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 7 of 9 
 
    
 
   
  
  
  
    
   
  
  
    
  
 
 
 
  
    
   The above policy is based on the following references: 
1.	 Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Oxlumo (lumasiran) injection, for subcutaneous use. Cambridge, MA: 
Alnylam; revised November 2020. 
2.	 Alnylam Pharmaceuticals. Oxlumo (lumasiran). Product Fact Sheet. Cambridge, MA: Alnylam 
Pharmaceuticals; 2020. Available at: https://www.alnylam.com/wp -content/uploads/pdfs/OXLUMO -
Product -Fact-Sheet.pdf. Accessed December 8, 2021. 
3.	 Cochat P, Rumsby G. Primary hyperoxaluria. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(7):649 -658. 
4.	 Liebow A, Li X, Racie T, et al. An investigational RNAi therapeutic targeting glycolate oxidase reduce s 
oxalate production in models of primary hyperoxaluria. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28(2):494 -503. 
5.	 McGregor TL, Hunt KA, Yee E, et al. Characterizing a healthy adult with a rare HAO1 knockout to 
support a therapeutic strategy for primary hyperoxaluria. Elife. 2020;9:e54363. 
6.	 Milliner DS. The primary hyperoxalurias: An algorithm for diagnosis. Am J Nephrol. 2005;25(2):154 - 
160. 
7.	 Niaudet P. Primary hyperoxaluria. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed 
November 2020. 
8.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). FDA approves first drug to treat rare metabolic disorder. 
FDA News Release. Silver Spring, MD: FDA; November 23, 2020.        
Lumasiran (Oxlumo) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 8 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
                 
        
                 
                  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan benefits and 
constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or 
program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any 
results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna 
or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be 
updated and therefore is subject to change. 
Copyright © 2001 -2022 Aetna Inc.        
 Lumasiran (Oxlumo) -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AETNA BETTER HEALTH® OF PENNSYLVANIA 
Amendment to 
Aetna Clinical Policy Bulletin Number: 0983 Lumasiran (Oxlumo) 
There are no amendments for Medicaid. 
Revised 02/22/2022 