 
 
 
Pharmacy  Policy  Bulletin  
 
Title:   Alpelisib (Vijoice ®) 
Policy  #: Rx.01.267  
 
Application of pharmacy policy is determined by benefits and contracts. Benefits may vary based on product 
line, group, or contract. Some medications may be subject to precertification, age, quantity, or formulary 
restrictions (ie limits on non -preferred drugs). Individual member benefits must be verified.  
This pharmacy policy document describes the status of pharmaceutical information and/or technology at the  
time the document was developed. Since that time, new information relating to drug efficacy, interactions, 
contraindications, dosage, administration routes, safety, or FDA approval may have changed. This Pharmacy 
Policy will be regularly updated as scient ific and medical literature becomes available. This information may 
include new FDA -approved indications, withdrawals, or other FDA alerts. This type of information is relevant 
not only when considering whether this policy should be updated, but also when applying it to current 
requests for coverage.  
Members are advised to use participating pharmacies in order to receive the highest level of benefits.  
Intent:  
The intent of this policy is to communicate the medical necessity criteria for  Alpelisib (Vijoice ®) as provided under the 
member's  prescription drug  benefit.  
 
Description:  
Testing for genetic mutations in the PIK3CA gene is done at initial MBC diagnosis if tumor is HR+/HER2 - following 
progression on or after an endocrine -based regimen. This gene effects cell growth and development and can contribute 
to a worse prognosis for patients. Knowledge of the presence of this mutation can inform providers in their treatment 
selection for these patients.  
 
Alpelisib is a small -molecule phosphatidylinositol -3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor with selective (and strong) activity against 
PI3Kα (André 2019). Mutations in the gene encoding the catalytic α -subunit of PI3K (PI3KCA) lead to activation of 
PI3Kα and Akt -signaling, cellular transformation, and tumor generation. Alpelisib inhibits phosphorylation of PI3K 
downstream targets (including Akt) and demonstrated activity in cell lines harboring a PIK3CA mutation. When 
compared with eith er agent alone, the combination of alpelisib with fulvestrant has synergistic antitumor activity in 
PIK3CA -mutated, estrogen receptor -positive models.  
 
Activating mutations in PIK3CA may induce a spectrum of overgrowths/malformations comprising clinically recognizable 
disorders commonly known as PIK3CA -related overgrowth spectrum (PROS). In an animal model PROS phenotype 
(congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevi, scoliosis/skeletal and spinal syndrome 
[CLOVES]), alpelisib inh ibited the PI3K pathway, resulting in prevention or improvement of organ abnormalities 
associated with the disease; findings were reversed following alpelisib withdrawal  
 
Breast cancer, advanced or metastatic: Treatment (in combination with fulvestrant) of  HR-positive, HER2 -negative, 
PIK3CA -mutated (as detected by an approved test), advanced or metastatic breast cancer in males and 
postmenopausal females following progression on or after an endocrine -based regimen.  
 
PIK3CA -related overgrowth spectrum: Treat ment of severe manifestations of PIK3CA -related overgrowth spectrum in 
patients ≥2 years of age who require systemic therapy.   
Policy:  
INITIAL CRITERIA Alpelisib (Vijoice) is approved when ALL of the following are met:  
 
1. Diagnosis of PIK3CA -Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS); and  
2. Documentation of mutation in the PIK3CA gene; and  
3. Member is 2 years of age or older; and  
4. Documentation of severe clinical ma nifestations (e.g., Congenital Lipomatous Overgrowth, 
Vascular malformations, Epidermal nevi, Scoliosis/skeletal and spinal [CLOVES], Facial Infiltrating 
Lipomatosis [FIL], Klippel -Trenaunay Syndrome [KTS], Megalencephaly -Capillary Malformation 
Polymicrogy ria [MCAP]); and  
5. Prescribed by or in consultation with a provider  who specialized in the treatment of PROS   
Initial authorization duration: 6 months  
 
REAUTHORIZATION CRITERIA Alpelisib (Vijoice®) is re -approved when ALL of the following are met:  
 
1. Docum entation of positive clinical response to therapy (e.g., radiological response defined as a ≥ 
20% reduction from baseline in the sum of target lesion volume); and  
2. Prescribed by or in consultation with a provider  who specializes in the treatment of PROS  
 
Reauthorization duration: 12 months  
  
 
Black  Box Warning  as shown  in the drug  Prescribing  Information:  
N/A 
Guidelines:  
Refer to the specific manufacturer's prescribing information for administration and dosage details and any applicable 
Black Box warnings.  
BENEFIT APPLICATION  
Subject to the terms and conditions of the applicable benefit contract, the applicable drug(s) identified in this policy is 
(are) covered under the prescription drug benefits of the Company’s products when the medical necessit y criteria listed 
in this pharmacy policy are met. Any services that are experimental/investigational or cosmetic are benefit contract 
exclusions for all products of the Company.  
References:  
André F, Ciruelos E, Rubovszky G, et al; SOLAR -1 Study Group. A lpelisib for PIK3CA -mutated, hormone receptor -
positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2019;380(20):1929 -1940.[PubMed 31091374]  
Venot Q, Blanc T, Rabia SH, et al. Targeted therapy in patients with PIK3CA -related overgrowth syndrome. Nature. 
2018;558( 7711):540 -546. doi:10.1038/s41586 -018-0217 -9[PubMed 29899452]  
Vijoice® (alpelisib) [prescribing information]. East Hanover, NJ: Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; April 2022. 
Available from: https://www.novartis.com/us -en/sites/novartis_us/files/vijoice .pdf. Accessed October 31, 2022.  
 
Applicable  Drugs:   
Inclusion of a drug in this table does not imply coverage. Eligibility, benefits, limitations, exclusions, 
precertification/referral requirements, provider contracts, and Company policies apply.  
 
  
Brand Name  Generic Name  
Vijoice ® Alpelisib  
  
Cross  References:  
Rx.01.33 Off Label Use  
Rx.01.76 Quantity Level Limits for Pharmaceuticals Covered Under the Prescription Drug Benefit  
 
Policy  Version  Number:   1.00 
P&T Approval  Date:   September 15, 2022  
Policy  Effective  Date:   January 01, 2023  
Next  Required  Review  Date:   September 15, 2023  
 
 The Policy Bulletins on this web site were developed to assist the Company in administering the provisions of the 
respective benefit programs, and do not constitute a contract. If you have coverage through the Company, please refer 
to your specific benefit program for the terms, conditions, limitations and exclusions of your coverage. Company does 
not provide health care services, medical advice or treatment, or guarantee the outcome or results of any medical 
services/treatments. The facility and professional providers are responsible for providing medical advice and treatment. 
Facility and professional providers are independent contractors and ar e not employees or agents of the Company. If 
you have a specific medical condition, please consult with your doctor. The Company reserves the right at any time to 
change or update its Policy Bulletins.  
 
 
  
  
 
 