 
Page 1 of 7 
Clinical Policy: Apremilast (Otezla)   
Reference Number: MDN.CP.PHAR .245 
Effective Date: 04.01.22  
Last Review Date: 04.22  
Line of Business: Meridian IL Medicaid   
 
  
Revision Log  
See Important Reminder  at the end of this policy for important regulatory and legal 
information.  
 
Description  
Apremilast  (Otezla®) is an inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) . 
 
FDA Approved I ndication (s) 
Otezla is indicated  for the treatment of : 
• Adult patients with active psoriatic arthritis  (PsA)  
• Patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis (PsO) who are candidates for phototherapy 
or systemic therapy  
• Adult patients with oral ulcers asso ciated with Behçet’s disease  (BD)  
 
Policy/Criteria  
Provider must submit documentation (such as office chart notes, lab results or other clinical 
information) supporting that member has met all approval criteria.  
 
It is the policy of  health plans affiliated with  Centene Corporation® that Otezla  is medicall y 
necessary  when the following criteria are met:  
 
I. Initial Approval Criteria  
A. Behçet’s Disease  (must meet all) : 
1. Diagnosis of oral ulcers in members with BD; 
2. Prescribed by or in consultation with a dermatologist or rheumatologist;  
3. Age ≥ 18 years;  
4. Failure of  a topical corticosteroid (e.g., t riamcinolone acetonide cream ) at up to 
maximally indicated doses, unless contraindicated or clinically significant advers e 
effects are experienced ; 
5. Failure of an oral corticosteroid (e.g., prednisone) at up to maximally indicated doses, 
unless contraindicated or clinically significant adverse effects are experienced ; 
6. Failure of colchicine at up to maximally indicated doses, unless contraindicated or 
clinically significant adverse effects are experienced ; 
7. Dose does not exceed 60 mg (2 tablets) per day.  
Approval duration: 6 months  
 
B. Plaque Psoriasis (must meet all) : 
1. Diagnosis of moderate -to-severe PsO as evidenced by involvement  of one of the 
following (a or b):  
a. ≥ 3% of total body surface area;  
b. Hands, feet, scalp, face, or genital area;  CLINICAL POLICY  
Apremilast  
 
Page 2 of 7 
2. Prescribed b y or in consultation with a dermatologist or rheumatologist;  
3. Age ≥ 18  years;  
4. Member meets one of the following (a or b):  
a. Failure of a ≥ 3 consecutive month trial of methotrexate ( MTX ) at up to 
maximally indicated doses ; 
b. Member has  intolerance or contraindication to MTX  (see Appendix D), and failure 
of a ≥ 3 consecutive month trial of cyclosporine  or acitretin  at up to maximally 
indicated doses, unless clinically significant adverse effects are experienced  or 
both are contraindicated ;  
5. If request is for concomitant use with biologic disease -modifying anti -rheumatic drug 
(DMARD) therapy (e.g., Humira®, Enbrel®, infliximab), member meets one of the 
following (a or b):  
a. Failure of a ≥ 3 consecutive month trial of MTX  used in combination with the 
biologic DMARD at up to maximally indicated doses;  
b. Member has  intolerance or contraindication to MTX  (see Appendix D), and failure 
of a ≥ 3 consecutive month trial of cyclosporine  or acitretin  used in combination 
with the biologic DMARD at up to maximally indicated doses, unless clinically 
significant adverse effects are experienced  or both are contraindicated ; 
6. Dose does not exceed 60  mg (2 tablets) per day . 
Approval duration:  6 months  
 
C. Psoriatic Arthritis (must meet all) : 
1. Diagnosis of  PsA;  
2. Prescribed b y or in consultation with a dermatologist or rheumatologist;  
3. Age ≥ 18  years;  
4. If request is for concomitant use with biologic DMARD therapy (e.g., Humira, 
Enbrel, infliximab), member meets one of the following (a or b):  
a. Failure of a ≥ 3 consecutive month trial of MTX  used in combination with the 
biologic DMARD at up to maximally indic ated doses;  
b. Member  has intolerance or contraindication to MTX  (see Appendix D), and failure 
of a ≥ 3 consecutive month trial of cyclosporine  or acitretin  used in combination 
with the biologic DMARD at up to maximally indicated doses, unless clinically 
significant adverse effects are experienced  or both are contraindicated  
5. Dose does not exceed 60  mg (2 tablets) per day . 
Approval duration:  6 months  
 
D. Other diagnoses/indications   
1. Refer  to the off-label use policy for the relevant line of business  if diagnosis  is NOT  
specifically listed under section II I (Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is 
NOT authorized) : CP.PMN.53  for Medicaid .  
 
II. Continued Therapy  
A. All Indications in Section I  (must meet all) :  
1. Currently receiving medication via Centene benefit or member has previously met 
initial approval criteria;  
2. Member is responding positively to therapy ;  CLINICAL POLICY  
Apremilast  
 
Page 3 of 7 
3. If request is for concomitant use with biologic DMARD therapy (e.g., Humira, 
Enbrel, infliximab), member meets one of the following (a or b):  
a. Failure of a ≥ 3 consecutive month trial of MTX  used in combination with the 
biologic DMARD at up to maximally indicated doses;  
b. Member  has intolerance or contraindication to MTX  (see Appendix  D), and failure 
of a ≥ 3 consecutive month trial of cyclosporine  or acitretin  used in combination 
with the biologic DMARD at up to maximally indicated doses, unless clinically 
significant adverse effects are experienced  or both are contraindicated  
4. If requ est is for a dose increa se, new dose does not exceed 60 mg (2 tablets) per day.  
Approval duration: 12 months  
 
B. Other diagnoses/indications (must meet 1 or 2) : 
1. Currently receiving medication via Centene  benefit and documentation supports 
positive response to therapy.   
Approval duration:  Duration of request or 6 months (whichever is less) ; or 
2. Refer to the off -label use policy for the relevant line of business if diagnosis is NOT 
specifically listed under section III ( Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is 
NOT authorized): CP.PMN.53  for Medicaid .  
 
III. Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized:  
A. Non-FDA  approved indications, which are not addressed in this policy, unless there is 
sufficient documentation of efficacy and safety according to the off label use policies –
CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid or  evidence of coverage documents .  
 
IV. Appendices/General Information  
Appendix A: Abbreviation /Acronym  Key 
BD: Behçet’s  disease   
DMARD: disease -modifying anti -
rheumatic drug  
FDA: Food and Drug Administration  MTX: methotrexate  
PDE4: phosphodiesterase 4  
PsO: plaque psoriasis  
PsA: psoriatic arthritis  
 
Appendix B : Therapeutic Alternatives   
This table provides a listing of preferred alternative therapy recommended in the approval 
criteria. The drugs listed here may not be a formulary agent for all relevant lines of business 
and may require prior authorization.   
Drug Name   Dosing Regimen  Dose  Limit/  
Maximum Dose  
acitretin (Soriatane®) PsO 
25 or 50 mg PO daily  50 mg/day  
cyclosporine 
(Sandimmune®, Neoral®) PsO 
2.5 mg/kg/day PO divided BID  4 mg/kg/day  
methotrexate 
(Rheumatrex®) PsO 
10 – 25 mg/week PO or 2.5 mg PO 
Q12 hr for 3 doses/week  30 mg/week  
 
 
triamcinolone acetonide 
cream (Orabase® 0.1%)  BD*  N/A CLINICAL POLICY  
Apremilast  
 
Page 4 of 7 
Drug Name   Dosing Regimen  Dose  Limit/  
Maximum Dose  
Apply topically to the isolated oral 
ulcer 3 to 4 times daily as needed for 
pain.  
prednisone  BD*  
Initial dose:   
Week 1: 15 mg PO daily  
Week 2 onwards: 10 mg PO daily 
tapered over 2 -3 weeks  
Maintenance dose ( if recurrent ):  
5 mg PO daily  1 mg/kg/day  
colchicine  (Colcrys®) BD* 
1.2 to 1.8 mg PO daily  1.8 mg/day  
Therapeutic alternatives are listed as Brand name® (generic) when the drug is available by brand name only 
and generic (Brand name®) when the drug is available by both brand and generic.  
*Off-label  
 
Appendix C: Contraindications/Boxed Warnings  
• Contraindication(s): known hypersensitivity to apremilast or to any of the excipients in 
the formulation  
• Boxed warning(s): none reported  
 
Appendix D: General Information  
• Failure of a trial of conventional DMARDs:  
o Child -bearing age is not considered a contraindication for use of MTX. Each drug has 
risks in pregnancy. An educated patient and family planning would allow use of MTX 
in patients who have no intention of immediate pregnancy.  
o Social use of alcohol is not considered a contraindicat ion for use of MTX. MTX may 
only be contraindicated if patients choose to drink over 14 units of alcohol per week. 
However, excessive alcohol drinking can lead to worsening of the condition, so 
patients who are serious about clinical response to therapy sh ould refrain from 
excessive alcohol consumption.  
• PsA:   
o  According to the 2018 American College of Rheumatology and National Psoriasis 
Foundation guidelines, TNF inhibitors or oral small molecules (e.g., methotrexate, 
sulfasalazine, cyclosporine, leflunomid e, apremilast) are preferred over other 
biologics (e.g., interleukin -17 inhibitors or interleukin -12/23 inhibitors) for treatment -
naïve disease. TNF inhibitors are also generally recommended over oral small 
molecules as first -line therapy unless disease is  not severe, member prefers oral 
agents, or TNF inhibitor therapy is contraindicated.  In patients with inadequate 
response to oral small molecules, the guidelines recommend adding Otezla to the 
current oral small molecule therapy or switching to a biologic  therapy. In patients 
with inadequate response to biologic monotherapy, the guidelines recommend 
switching to a different biologic agent over addition of MTX to the current biologic 
agent; there are no recommendations that address adding or switching to Ot ezla. CLINICAL POLICY  
Apremilast  
 
Page 5 of 7 
o The 2019 European League Against Rheumatism guidelines recommend Otezla only 
in patients with mild disease who have inadequate response to a conventional 
DMARD and in whom neither biologic DMARDs nor targeted synthetic DMARDs 
(e.g., Janus kinase inhi bitors) are appropriate.  
• PsO: The 2019 American Academy of Dermatology and National Psoriasis Foundation 
guidelines recommend the combination of a biologic therapy with MTX over 
combination of a biologic therapy with Otezla, noting that there are limited data and the 
long-term safety and efficacy of the latter combination is unknown.  
• Otezla is the first and only FDA -approved treatment for oral ulcers associated with 
Behçet's disease.  However, p atients included in the pivotal study had prior treatment with 
at least one non -biologic Behçet's disease therapy, such as, but not limited to, topical 
corticosteroids, or systemic treatment.  
 
V. Dosage and Administration   
Indication  Dosing Regimen  Maximum Dose  
PsO, PsA, BD  
 
 Initial dose:  
Day 1: 10 mg PO QAM  
Day 2: 10 mg PO QAM and 10 mg PO QPM  
Day 3: 10 mg PO QAM and 20 mg PO QPM  
Day 4: 20 mg PO QAM and 20 mg PO QPM  
Day 5: 20 mg PO QAM and 30 mg PO QPM  
 
Maintenance dose:  
Day 6 and thereafter: 30 mg PO BID  60 mg/day  
 
VI. Product Availability   
Tablets: 10 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg 
 
VII. References  
1. Otezla Prescribing Information. Summit, NJ: Celgene Corporation; June 2020 . Available at : 
https://www.otezla.com/ . Accessed August 23, 2021 .  
2. Menter  A, Gottlieb A, Feldman SR, Van Voorhees AS, Leonardi CL, Gordon KB, et al. 
American Academy of Dermatology. Guidelines of care for the management of psoriasis and 
psoriatic arthritis: Section 1. Overview of psoriasis and guidelines of care for the treatme nt of 
psoriasis with biologics. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2008; 58(5):826 -50. 
3. Gossec L, Smolen JS, Ramiro S, et al European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) 
recommendations for the management of psoriatic arthritis with pharmacological therapies : 
2015 update An nals of the Rheumatic Diseases Published Online First: 07 December 2015. 
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis -2015 -208337 . 
4. Singh JA, Guyatt G,  Ogdie A, et al. 2018  American College of Rheumatology/National 
Psoriasis  Foundation Guideline for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis. American College of 
Rheumatology . 2019 ; 71(1):5 -32. doi: 10.1002/art.40726  
5. Hatemi G, Mahr  A, Takeno M, et al. Improvements and correlations in oral ulcers, disease 
activity, and QOL in behçet’s syndrome patients treated with apremilast: a phase 3 
randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled study. Rheumatology . Volume 58, Issue 
Supplement_2, March 2019, kez062.023, https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kez062.02  CLINICAL POLICY  
Apremilast  
 
Page 6 of 7 
6. Hatemi G, Christensen R, Bang D, et al. 2018 update of the EULAR recommendations for 
the management of Behçet’s syndrome . Annals of the Rheumatic Disease s. 2018;77:808 -818. 
7. Menter A, Strober BE, Kaplan DH, et al. Joint AAD -NPF guidelines of care for the 
management and treatment of psoriasis with biologics. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2019;80:1029 -
72. doi:10.1016/j.aad.201811.057.  
 
Reviews, Revisions, and Approvals  Date  P&T 
Approval 
Date  
Policy created, adapted from CP.PHAR .245 04.01.22  04.22  
 
Important Reminder  
This clinical polic y has been developed by appropriately experienced and licensed health care 
professionals based on a review and consideration of currently available generally accepted 
standards of medical practice; peer -reviewed medical literature; government  agency/program 
approval status; evidence -based guidelines and positions of leading national health professional 
organizations; views of physicians practicing in relevant clinical areas affected by this clinical 
policy; and other available clinical informa tion. The Health Plan  makes no representations and 
accepts no liability with respect to the content of any external information used or relied upon in 
developing this clinical policy. This clinical policy is consistent with standards of medical 
practice cu rrent at the time that this clinical policy was approved. “Health Plan” means a health 
plan that has adopted this clinical policy and that is operated or administered, in whole or in part, 
by Centene Management Company, LLC, or any of such health plan’s af filiates, as applicable.  
 
The purpose of this clinical policy is to provide a guide to medical necessity, which is a 
component of the guidelines used to assist in making coverage decisions and administering 
benefits. It does not constitute a contract or gu arantee regarding payment or results. Coverage 
decisions and the administration of benefits are subject to all terms, conditions, exclusions and 
limitations of the coverage documents (e.g., evidence of coverage, certificate of coverage, policy, 
contract of  insurance, etc.), as well as to state and federal requirements and applicable Health 
Plan-level administrative policies and procedures.  
 
This clinical policy is effective as of the date determined by the Health Plan. The date of posting 
may not be the eff ective date of this clinical policy. This clinical policy may be subject to 
applicable legal and regulatory requirements relating to provider notification. If there is a 
discrepancy between the effective date of this clinical policy and any applicable lega l or 
regulatory requirement, the requirements of law and regulation shall govern. The Health Plan 
retains the right to change, amend or withdraw this clinical policy, and additional clinical 
policies may be developed and adopted as needed, at any time.  
 
This clinical policy does not constitute medical advice, medical treatment or medical care.  It is 
not intended to dictate to providers how to practice medicine. Providers are expected to exercise 
professional medical judgment in providing the most appropria te care, and are solely responsible 
for the medical advice and treatment of members.  This clinical policy is not intended to 
recommend treatment for members. Members should consult with their treating physician in 
connection with diagnosis and treatment d ecisions.  CLINICAL POLICY  
Apremilast  
 
Page 7 of 7 
 
Providers referred to in this clinical policy are independent contractors who exercise independent 
judgment and over whom the Health Plan has no control or right of control.  Providers are not 
agents or employees of the Health Plan.  
 
This clini cal policy is the property of the Health Plan . Unauthorized copying, use, and 
distribution of this clinical policy or any information contained herein are strictly prohibited.  
Providers, members and their representatives are bound to the terms and conditi ons expressed 
herein through the terms of their contracts.  Where no such contract exists, providers, members 
and their representatives agree to be bound by such terms and conditions by providing services to 
members and/or submitting claims for payment for  such services.  
 
Note:  
For Medicaid members , when state Medicaid coverage provisions conflict with the coverage 
provisions in this clinical policy, state Medicaid coverage provisions take precedence. Please 
refer to the state Medicaid manual for any cover age provisions pertaining to this clinical policy.  
 
©2016  Centene Corporation.  All rights reserved.  All materials are exclusively owned by 
Centene Corporation and are protected by United States copyright law and international 
copyright law.   No part of this publication may be reproduced, copied, modified, distributed, 
displayed, stored  in a retrieval system, transmitted in any form or by any means, or otherwise 
published without the prior written permission of Centene Corporation. You may not alter or 
remove any trademark, copyright or other notice contained herein. Centene® and Centene  
Corporation® are registered trademarks exclusively owned by Centene Corporation.  