 
 
Medical and Drug
Policies
Policies & Guidelines
Advanced Imaging
Draft Policies
Autism Spectrum Mandate
Behavioral Health
Blue Advantage Policies
Advanced Imaging
Draft Policies
Genetic Testing
Draft Genetic Testing Policies
Medical Policies
Draft Policies
Final Policies
Provider-Administered Drug Policies (Excluding Oncology)
Current Provider-Administered Drug Policies
Draft Provider-Administered Drug Policies
Previous Provider-Administered Drug Policies
Provider-Administered Oncology Drug Policies
Current Provider-Administered Oncology Drug Policies
Draft Provider-Administered Oncology Drug Policies
Previous Provider-Administered Oncology Drug Policies
Radiation Therapy
Draft Policies
Chronic Condition Management
Genetic Testing
Draft Genetic Testing Policies
HealthSmartRx Smart RxAssist Program
Hemophilia Drugs
Draft Hemophilia Drug Policies
Final Hemophilia Drug Policies
Hemophilia Drug Prior Authorization
PEEHIP Hemophilia Drug Program
Medical Policies
Draft Medical Policies
Final Medical Policies
Provider-Administered Drug Policies (Excluding Oncology)
Draft Provider-Administered Drug Policies
Final Provider-Administered Drug Precertification Policies
Mandatory Site of Service
Provider-Administered Drug Claim Edit Policies
Voluntary Site of Service
Provider-Administered Oncology Drug Policies
Current Provider-Administered Oncology Drug Policies
Draft Provider-Administered Oncology Drug Policies
Radiation Therapy
Draft Policies
Self-Administered Drug Policies
Draft Self-Administered Drug Policies
Final Self-Administered Drug Policies
Self-Administered Drug Prior Authorization Forms
Transgender Services
 
mp-624
 
Print
 
 
BackAmniotic Membrane Grafts for Ophthalmic Indications
Policy Number: MP-624
 
Latest Review Date: February 2023
Category:  Vision                                                            
POLICY:
Human amniotic membrane grafts (with or without suture [e.g. Prokera®, AmbioDisk
™
], and/or with suture or glue) for the
treatment of the following ophthalmic indications may be considered medically necessary:
Absence of iris;
Bullous keratopathy;
Conjunctivochalasis;
Corneal degeneration;
Corneal ectasia, corneal staphyloma, descemetocele or other corneal deformity;
Corneal ulceration or defect;
Corneal disorder due to contact lens or recurrent erosion of cornea;
Corneal perforation when there is active inflammation after corneal transplant requiring adjunctive treatment;
Following removal of conjunctival lesion(s);
Hereditary corneal dystrophies;
Neurotrophic keratoconjunctivitis;
Ocular burns;
Stevens-Johnsons Syndrome;
Partial limbal stem cell deficiency with extensive diseased tissue where selective removal alone is not sufficient;
Persistent epithelial defects that do not respond to conservative therapy;
Pterygium;
Pseudopterygium
Human amniotic membrane grafts for the treatment of dry eye syndrome and/or any other indication not listed above is considered
investigational.
DESCRIPTION OF PROCEDURE OR SERVICE:
Several commercially available forms of human amniotic membrane (HAM) are available. Amniotic membrane is being evaluated for
the treatment of a variety of ophthalmic conditions.
HAM consists of two conjoined layers (the amnion and chorion) to form the innermost lining of the amniotic sac or placenta. When
prepared for use as an allograft, the membrane is harvested immediately after birth and is cleaned, sterilized, and cryopreserved.
Many products available using amnion, chorion, amniotic fluid, and umbilical cord are being studied for use in the treatment of a
variety of ophthalmic conditions. The products are formulated either as patches that can be applied as wound covers, or as
suspensions, particulates, or connective tissue extractions, which can be injected or applied topically.
HAM contains collagen, fibronectin, and hyaluronic acid, a combination of growth factors, cytokines, and anti-inflammatory proteins
(such as interleukin-1 receptor antagonist). There is evidence that the tissue has anti-inflammatory, antifibroblastic, and
antimicrobial properties. HAM is considered nonimmunogenic and has not been observed to cause a substantial immune response.
It is believed that these properties are retained in cryopreserved HAM and HAM products, resulting in a readily available tissue with
regenerative potential.
The use of a HAM graft fixated by sutures is an established treatment of ophthalmic conditions. HAM products that are inserted like a
contact lens have been investigated for the treatment of corneal and ocular surface disorders. The availability of HAM opens the
possibility of regenerative medicine for an array of conditions.
KEY POINTS:
The most recent literature update was performed through January 20, 2023.
Summary of Evidence
Sutured HAM transplant has been used for many years for the treatment of ophthalmic conditions. Many of these conditions are
rare, leading to difficulty in conducting randomized control trials (RCTs). Of the evidence available, relevant outcomes are symptoms,
morbid events, functional outcomes, and quality of life. The rarity, severity, and variability of the ophthalmic condition was taken
into consideration while evaluating the evidence. Clinical input was sought to help determine whether the use of HAM graft either
without or with suture fixation for several ophthalmic conditions would provide a clinically meaningful improvement in the net
health outcome and whether the use is consistent with generally accepted medical practice. In response to requests, clinical input
was received from two respondents, including one specialty society-level response and one physician-level response identified
through specialty societies including physicians with academic medical center affiliations.
Bullous keratopathy as a palliative measure in patients who are not candidates for a curative treatment (e.g.,
endothelial or penetrating keratoplasty)For individuals who have bullous keratopathy who are not candidates for curative treatment (e.g., endothelial or penetrating
keratoplasty) who receive HAM, the evidence includes an RCT.  The RCT found no advantage of sutured HAM over the simpler
stromal puncture procedure for the treatment of pain from bullous keratopathy, however, clinical input supported the use of
amniotic membrane in individuals with this indication as an alternative to stromal puncture. The evidence is sufficient to determine
that the technology results in a meaningful improvement in the net health outcome.
Corneal perforation when corneal tissue is not immediately available
For individuals who have corneal perforation when corneal tissue is not immediately available who receive sutured HAM, the
evidence is limited. The standard treatment for corneal perforation is corneal transplantation, however, HAM may provide temporary
coverage of the severe defect when corneal tissue is not immediately available. The evidence is sufficient to determine that the
technology results in a meaningful improvement in the net health outcome.
Corneal perforation when there is active inflammation after corneal transplant requiring adjunctive treatment
For individuals with corneal perforation with active inflammation after corneal transplant requiring adjunctive treatment who receive
HAM, the evidence is limited. No comparative evidence was identified for this indication. Clinical input supported the use of HAM in
individuals with corneal perforation when there is active inflammation after corneal transplant requiring adjunctive treatment. The
evidence is sufficient to determine that the technology results in a meaningful improvement in the net health outcome.
Corneal ulcers and melts that do not respond to initial medical therapy
For individuals who have corneal ulcers and melts that do not respond to initial medical therapy who receive HAM, the evidence
includes a systematic review of primarily case series and a non-randomized comparative study. The systematic review showed
healing in 97% of patients with an improvement of vision in 53% of eyes. One retrospective comparative study with 22 patients
found more rapid and complete epithelialization and more patients with a clinically significant improvement in visual acuity
following early treatment with self-retained HAM when compared to historical controls. Corneal ulcers and melts are uncommon
and variable and RCTs are not expected. Clinical input supported the use of HAM in individuals with corneal ulcers and melts that do
not respond to initial medical therapy. The evidence is sufficient to determine that the technology results in a meaningful
improvement in the net health outcome.
Dry eye syndrome
For individuals who have severe dry eye syndrome who receive HAM, the evidence is limited. In the article, ‘Treatment outcomes in
the DRy Eye Amniotic Membrane (DREAM) study’, a retrospective chart review was conducted of patients with dry eye syndrome who
received HAM with at least three months of follow-up was discussed. The patients included in this study were affected by at least one
of the following indications: severe dry eye, punctate keratitis, filamentary keratitis, exposure keratitis, neurotropic keratitis, and
corneal epithelial defect. The patients in this study continued to use conventional treatment as per their usual routine. It is theorized
that the use of HAM can decrease the need for use of prescription medication to alleviate dry eye syndrome, however, evidence for
patients who are able to eliminate the standard of care treatment from their treatment plan is insufficient. In the article, ‘Sutureless
Amniotic Membrane ProKera for Ocular Surface Disorders: Short-Term Results’, a retrospective chart review of patients who received
HAM for ocular surface disorders was discussed. Some success was seen initially in the treatment of dry eye syndrome, however,
recurrence of the primary pathologic condition occurred. Sutured HAM is not typically used for severe dry eye alone, but may be
necessary in the face of one or more concomitant diseases discussed in the other sections of this policy. Further, well-designed
scientific evidence displaying long term effects and a meaningful change in treatment protocol with elimination of use of current
standard of care is needed. The evidence is insufficient to determine that the technology results in a meaningful improvement in the
net health outcome when dry eye disease is not accompanied by another disorder.
Moderate or severe acute ocular chemical burns
For individuals who have moderate or severe acute ocular chemical burns who receive HAM, the evidence includes RCTs and
retrospective chare reviews. Evidence includes a total of 197 patients with acute ocular chemical burns who were treated with HAM
plus medical therapy or medical therapy alone. Two of the three RCTs did not show a faster rate of epithelial healing, and there was
no significant benefit for other outcomes. In the article, Sutureless Amniotic Membrane ProKera for Ocular Surface Disorders: Short-
Term Results, a chart review of patients who received HAM reports that treatment is easy to use and reasonably well tolerated, with
encouraging results in acute moderate chemical injury. Clinical input supported the use of HAM individuals with moderate or severe
acute ocular chemical burn. The evidence is sufficient to determine that the technology results in a meaningful improvement in the
net health outcome.
Moderate or severe Stevens - Johnson syndrome
For individuals who have moderate or severe Stevens-Johnson syndrome who receive HAM, the evidence includes an RCT that
reported 25 patients (50 eyes) found improved symptoms and function with HAM compared to medical therapy alone. Clinical input
supported the use of HAM for this indication. The evidence is sufficient to determine that the technology results in a meaningful
improvement in the net health outcome.
Neurotrophic keratitis with ocular surface damage and inflammation that does not respond to conservative therapy
For individuals who have neurotrophic keratitis with ocular surface damage and inflammation that does not respond to conservative
therapy who receive HAM, the evidence includes an RCT of 30 patients that showed no benefit of sutured HAM graft compared
to tarsorrhaphy or bandage contact lens. Clinical input supported the use of HAM in individuals with this indication. The evidence is
sufficient to determine that the technology results in a clinical meaningful improvement in the net health outcome.
Neuropathic corneal pain
For individuals who suffer neuropathic corneal pain, the evidence includes the article, Efficacy of self-retained cryopreservedamniotic membrane for treatment of neuropathic corneal pain, which is a retrospective single center medical record review of nine
patients that evaluated the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of ProKera for the acute treatment of neuropathic corneal pain. The study
concludes that the use of HAM represents a novel and promising therapeutic option for patients with neuropathic corneal pain.
Small sample size (ten eyes of nine patients) and reported placebo effect experienced in one patient (“patient #4 reported
simultaneous resolution of pain the ProKera® Clear untreated eye”) are limitations of this study. Further studies with larger sample
size and long term effects is needed to provide efficacy of this treatment. The evidence is insufficient to determine that the
technology results in a meaningful improvement in the net health outcome.
Partial limbal stem cell deficiency with extensive diseased tissue where selective removal alone is not sufficient
For individuals who have partial limbal stem cell deficiency with extensive diseased tissue where selective removal alone is not
sufficient and receive HAM, the evidence is limited. No RCTs were identified. Improvement in visual acuity has been reported for
some patients who have received HAM in conjunction with removal of the diseased limbus. Clinical input supported the use of HAM
in individuals with this indication. The evidence is sufficient to determine that the technology results in a meaningful improvement in
the net health outcome.
Persistent epithelial defects and ulceration that do not respond to conservative therapy
For individuals who have persistent epithelial defects that do not respond to conservative therapy who receive HAM, the evidence is
limited. No comparative trials were identified on persistent epithelial defects and ulceration. Clinical input for this indication
supported the use of HAM. The evidence is sufficient to determine that the technology results in a meaningful improvement in the
net health outcome.
Pterygium repair when there is insufficient healthy tissue to create a conjunctival autograft
For individuals who need pterygium repair when there is insufficient healthy tissue to create a conjunctival autograft who receive
HAM the evidence includes a systematic review of RCTs that found conjunctival or limbal autograft is more effective than HAM graft
in reducing the rate of pterygium recurrence. However, clinical input supported the use of HAM in individuals with pterygium repair
when there is insufficient healthy tissue to create a conjunctival autograft. The evidence is sufficient to determine that the
technology results in a meaningful improvement in the net health outcome.
Superficial punctate keratitis and filamentary keratitis
Superficial punctate keratitis is a nonspecific finding typically caused by an identifiable ocular condition. Filamentary keratitis is an
uncommon condition associated with various kinds of ocular surface diseases or conditions.  The causative condition of these
findings in a patient may be appropriate for treatment with HAM based on scientific evidence or high quality clinical input that has
proven HAM is likely to produce a positive outcome in the net health outcome. These causative conditions/indications are listed in
the policy statement of this medical policy. Due to the paucity of well-designed scientific trials and evidence to demonstrate an
improvement in net health outcomes in patients with indications not included in our policy statement, such indications are found to
have insufficient evidence to determine that the technology results in a meaningful improvement in the net health outcome.
Practice Guidelines and Position Statements
The purpose of the following information is to provide reference material. Inclusion does not imply endorsement or alignment with
the evidence review conclusions.
Tear Film and Ocular Surface Society
In 2017, the Tear Film and Ocular Surface Society published the Dry Eye Workshop II (DEWS) management and therapy report. The
report evaluated the evidence on treatments for dry eye and provided a treatment algorithm for dry eye disease management that
includes four steps.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendations
Not applicable.
KEY WORDS:
Absence of iris, Amniotic membrane transplantation, AMT, dry eye syndrome, keratopathy, bullous keratopathy, conjunctivochalasis,
corneal degeneration, corneal ectasia, corneal staphyloma, descemetocele, other corneal deformity, corneal ulceration, corneal
defect, corneal disorder due to contact lens or recurrent erosion of cornea, conjunctival lesion removal, hereditary corneal
dystrophies, neurotrophic keratoconjunctivitis, ocular burns, pterygium, pseudopterygium, Stevens-Johnsons Syndrome, SJS,
Prokera, HAM, human amniotic membrane
APPROVED BY GOVERNING BODIES:
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates human cells and tissues intended for implantation, transplantation, or
infusion through the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, under Code of Federal Regulation (CFR) title 21, parts 1270 and
1271. Human amniotic membrane products and amniotic fluid products are included in these regulations. In 2017, the FDA
published clarification of what is considered minimal manipulation and homologous use for human cells, tissues, and cellular and
tissue-based products (HCT/Ps).
HCT/Ps are defined as human cells or tissues that are intended for implantation, transplantation, infusion, or transfer into a human
recipient. If an HCT/P does not meet the criteria below and does not qualify for any of the stated exceptions, the HCT/P will be
regulated as a drug, device, and/or biological product and applicable regulations and premarket review will be required.An HCT/P is regulated solely under section 361 of the PHS Act and 21 CFR Part 1271 if it meets all of the following criteria:
1
. 
"The HCT/P is minimally manipulated;
2
. 
The HCT/P is intended for homologous use only, as reflected by the labeling, advertising, or other indications of the
manufacturer’s objective intent;
3
. 
The manufacture of the HCT/P does not involve the combination of the cells or tissues with another article, except for water,
crystalloids, or a sterilizing, preserving, or storage agent, provided that the addition of water, crystalloids, or the sterilizing,
preserving, or storage agent does not raise new clinical safety concerns with respect to the HCT/P; and
4
. 
Either:
The HCT/P does not have a systemic effect and is not dependent upon the metabolic activity of living cells for its primary
function; or
The HCT/P has a systemic effect or is dependent upon the metabolic activity of living cells for its primary function, and:
Is for autologous use;
Is for allogeneic use in a first-degree or second-degree blood relative; or
Is for reproductive use."
The guidance provides the following specific examples of homologous and non-homologous use for amniotic membrane:
“An amniotic membrane product is applied to the surface of the eye to cover or offer protection from the surrounding environment
in ocular repair and reconstruction procedures. This is homologous use because serving as a covering and offering protection from
the surrounding environment are basic functions of amniotic membrane."
The FDA noted the intention to exercise enforcement discretion for the next 36 months after publication of the guidance.
In 2003, Prokera
™
 was cleared for marketing by FDA through the 510(k) process for the ophthalmic conformer that incorporates
amniotic membrane (K032104). The FDA determined that this device was substantially equivalent to the Symblepharon Ring. The
Prokera
™
 device is intended “for use in eyes in which the ocular surface cells have been damaged, or underlying stroma is inflamed
and scarred.” The development of Prokera, a commercially available product, was supported in part by the National Institute of
Health and the National Eye Institute.
AmnioClip (FORTECH GmbH) is a ring designed to hold the amniotic membrane in the eye without sutures or glue fixation. A
mounting device is used to secure the amniotic membrane within the AmnioClip. The AmnioClip currently has CE approval in Europe.
BENEFIT APPLICATION:
Coverage is subject to member’s specific benefits.  Group specific policy will supersede this policy when applicable.
ITS: Home Policy provisions apply.
FEP: Special benefit consideration may apply. Refer to member’s benefit plan.
CURRENT CODING:
CPT Codes:
65778
Placement of amniotic membrane on the ocular surface; without sutures
65779 
;single layer, sutured
65780
Ocular surface reconstruction; amniotic membrane transplantation, multiple layers
REFERENCES:
1
. 
Bouchard CS, John T. Amniotic membrane transplantation in the management of severe ocular surface disease: indications
and outcomes. Ocul Surf. Jul 2004; 2(3): 201-11.
2
. 
Chansanti O, Horatanaruang O. The results of amniotic membrane transplantation for symptomatic bullous keratopathy. J
Med Assoc Thai. 2005; 88 Suppl 9:557-S62.
3
. 
Cheng AM, Zhao D, Chen R, et al. Accelerated restoration of ocular surface health in dry eye disease by self-retained
cryopreserved amniotic membrane. Ocul Surf. Jan 2016; 14(1):56-63.
4
. 
Clare G, Suleman H, Bunce C, et al. Amniotic membrane transplantation for acute ocular burns. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2012; 9:CD009379.
5
. 
Clearfield E, Muthappan V, Wang X, et al. Conjunctival autograft for pterygium. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Feb 11 2016;
2:CD011349.
6
. 
Eslani M, Baradaran-Rafii A, Cheung AY, et al. Amniotic Membrane Transplantation in Acute Severe Ocular Chemical Injury: A
Randomized Clinical Trial. Am J Ophthalmol. Mar 2019; 199: 209-215.
7
. 
Food and Drug Administration. 510(k) Summary: ProKera
™
 Bio-Tissue Inc. (K032104). 2003; https:
//www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf3/K032104.pdf. Gregory DG. Treatment of acute Stevens-Johnson syndrome and
toxic epidermal necrolysis using amniotic membrane: A review of 10 consecutive cases. Opthalmology. 2011; 118(5):908-14.
8
. 
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2011. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
9
. 
John T, Tighe S, Sheha H, et al. Corneal Nerve Regeneration after Self-Retained Cryopreserved Amniotic Membrane in Dry Eye
Disease. J Ophthalmol. 2017; 2017: 6404918.
10
. 
Kaufman SC, Jacobs DS, Lee WB, et al. Options and adjuvants in surgery for pterygium: a report by the American Academy of
Ophthalmology. Ophthalmology. Jan 2013; 120(1):201-208.11
. 
Kheirkhah A, Casas V, Raju VK, et al. Sutureless amniotic membrane transplantation for partial limbal stem cell deficiency. Am J
Ophthalmol. May 2008; 145(5): 787-94.
12
. 
Khokhar S, Natung T, Sony P, et al. Amniotic membrane transplantation in refractory neurotrophic corneal ulcers: a
randomized, controlled clinical trial. Cornea. 2005; 24:654–660.
13
. 
Kim HK, Park HS. Fibrin glue-assisted augmented amniotic membrane transplantation for the treatment of large noninfectious
corneal perforations. Cornea. 2009; 28(2): 170-76.
14
. 
Liu J, Li L, Li X. Effectiveness of Cryopreserved Amniotic Membrane Transplantation in Corneal Ulceration: A Meta-Analysis.
Cornea. 2019 Apr; 38(4).
15
. 
McDonald MB, Sheha H, Tighe S, et al. Treatment outcomes in the Dry Eye Amniotic Membrane (DREAM) study. Clin
Ophthalmol. 2018 Apr 9; 12:677-681.
16
. 
Morkin, M. I. and P. Hamrah. "Efficacy of self-retained cryopreserved amniotic membrane for treatment of neuropathic
corneal pain." Ocul Surf 2018, 16(1): 132-138.
17
. 
Pachigolla G, Prasher P, Di Pascuale MA, et al. Evaluation of the role of ProKera in the management of ocular surface and
orbital disorders. Eye Contact Lens. 2009; 35(4):172-175
18
. 
Paris Fdos S, Goncalves ED, Campos MS, et al. Amniotic membrane transplantation versus anterior stromal puncture in bullous
keratopathy: a comparative study. Br J Ophthalmol. Aug 2013; 97(8):980-984.
19
. 
Parolini O, Soncini M, Evangelista M, et al. Amniotic membrane and amniotic fluid-derived cells: potential tools for
regenerative medicine? Regen Med. Mar 2009; 4(2):275-291.
20
. 
Prabhasawat P, Tesavibul N, Prakairungthong N, et al. Efficacy of amniotic membrane patching for acute chemical and thermal
ocular burns. J Med Assoc Thal. 2007; 90: 319-26.
21
. 
Sharma N, Thenarasun SA, Kaur M, et al. Adjuvant role of amniotic membrane transplantation in acute ocular Stevens -
Johnson syndrome: a randomized control trial. Ophthalmology. Mar 2016; 123(3):484-491.
22
. 
Shay E, Kheirkhah A, Liang L, et al. Amniotic membrane transplantation as a new therapy for the acute ocular manifestations of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Surv Ophthalmol. 2009; 54(6):686-96.
23
. 
Srinivas S, Mavrikakis E, Jenkins C. Amniotic membrane transplantation for painful bullous keratopathy. Eur J Ophthalmol.
2007; 17(1):7-10.
24
. 
Suri K, Kosker M, Raber I, et al. Sutureless Amniotic Membrane ProKera for Ocular Surface Disorders. Short-Term Results. Eye
Contact Lens. 2013;39:341-347
25
. 
Tamhane A, Vajpayee RB, Biswas NR, et al. Evaluation of amniotic membrane transplantation as an adjunct to medicaltherapy
as compared with medical therapy alone in acute ocular burns. Ophthalmology. Nov 2005; 112(11): 1963-9.
26
. 
Tandon R, Gupta N, Kalaivani M, et al. Amniotic membrane transplantation as an adjunct to medical therapy in acute ocular
burns. Br J Ophthalmol. 2011; 95(2): 199-204.
27
. 
Toman J, Michael GM, Wisco OJ, et al. Mohs Defect Repair with Dehydrated Human Amnion/Chorion Membrane. Facial Plast
Surg Aesthet Med. Jan-Feb 2022; 24(1): 48-53.
28
. 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Regulatory Considerations for Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue-Based
Products: Minimal Manipulation and Homologous Use Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff. 2017
https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=FDA-2017-D-6146-0003 Vlasov A, Sia RK, Ryan DS, et al. Sutureless cryopreserved
amniotic membrane graft and wound healing after photorefractive keratectomy. J Cataract Refract Surg. Mar 2016; 42(3):435-
443.
29
. 
Yin HY, Cheng AMS, Tighe S, et al. Self-retained cryopreserved amniotic membrane for treating severe corneal ulcers: a
comparative, retrospective control study. Sci Rep. Oct 12 2020; 10(1): 17008.
POLICY HISTORY:
Medical Policy Group, February 2016 (6):  Newly adopted policy.
Medical Policy Administration Committee, March 2016
Available for comment March 4 through May 5, 2016
Medical Policy Group, May 2016 (3): Updated literature review and clarified/expanded policy statement indications; updated Key
Words & References
Medical Policy Administration Committee, May 2016
Medical Policy Panel, May 2017
Medical Policy Group, July 2017 (3): 2017 Updates on Description, Key Points, Governing Bodies, Key Words & References; clarified
policy statements with types of grafts approved to coincide with coding and moved regulatory language to Governing Bodies section
– no change in intent
Medical Policy Panel, February 2018
Medical Policy Group, March 2018 (3):  2018 Updates to Key Points & References; no change in policy statements
Medical Policy Panel February 2019
Medical Policy Group, June 2019 (6) Updates to Description, Key Points, Practice Guidelines and References. Policy statement
updated to include coverage for: Partial limbal stem cell deficiency, Persistent Epithelial defects and corneal perforation after corneal
transplant.
Medical Policy Panel, February 2020
Medical Policy Group, February 2020 (6): Updates to Key Points, Governing Bodies and References.CPT codes, descriptions and data copyright ©BCBSPREVIOUSYEAR American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Applicable FARS/DFARS apply.
CDT codes, descriptions and data copyright ©BCBSPREVIOUSYEAR American Dental Association. All rights reserved.
© BCBSCURRENTYEAR Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. 
Medical Policy Panel, February 2021
Medical Policy Group, February 2021 (9): 2021 Updates to Key Points, Governing Bodies, Description, References. Key words added:
HAM; human amniotic membrane. Policy section updated to remove not medically necessary from statement, no change to intent.
Medical Policy Panel, February 2022
Medical Policy Group, February 2022 (9): 2022 Updates to Description, Key Points, References. Policy statement wording “Amniotic
membrane transplantation” changed to “human amniotic membrane grafts”; “corneal conditions” changed to “ophthalmic
indications”; “grafts that are with or without fixated using sutures (e.g., Prokera®, AmbioDisk
™
), glue fixation, secured under a
bandage, contact lens, self-contained or unfixated”, changed to “with or without suture [e.g. Prokera®, AmbioDisk
™
], and/or with
suture or glue”. No change to intent of policy statement. Policy statement portion effective prior to June 26, 2019 removed. Title
changed from "Amniotic Membrane Transplantation for the Ocular Surface" to "Amniotic Membrane Grafts for Ophthalmic
Indications".
Medical Policy Group, June 2022 (9): Updates to Description, References. No change to policy statement.
Medical Policy Panel, February 2023
Medical Policy Group, February 2023 (9): Update to Key Points, Benefit Application and References; no change to policy statement.
This medical policy is not an authorization, certification, explanation of benefits, or a contract. Eligibility and benefits are determined on a
case-by-case basis according to the terms of the member’s plan in effect as of the date services are rendered. All medical policies are based
on (i) research of current medical literature and (ii) review of common medical practices in the treatment and diagnosis of disease as of the
date hereof. Physicians and other providers are solely responsible for all aspects of medical care and treatment, including the type, quality,
and levels of care and treatment.
This policy is intended to be used for adjudication of claims (including pre-admission certification, pre-determinations, and pre-procedure
review) in Blue Cross and Blue Shield’s administration of plan contracts.
The plan does not approve or deny procedures, services, testing, or equipment for our members. Our decisions concern coverage only. The
decision of whether or not to have a certain test, treatment or procedure is one made between the physician and his/her patient. The plan
administers benefits based on the member’s contract and corporate medical policies. Physicians should always exercise their best medical
judgment in providing the care they feel is most appropriate for their patients. Needed care should not be delayed or refused because of a
coverage determination.
As a general rule, benefits are payable under health plans only in cases of medical necessity and only if services or supplies are not
investigational, provided the customer group contracts have such coverage.
The following Association Technology Evaluation Criteria must be met for a service/supply to be considered for coverage:
1. The technology must have final approval from the appropriate government regulatory bodies;
2. The scientific evidence must permit conclusions concerning the effect of the technology on health outcomes;
3. The technology must improve the net health outcome;
4. The technology must be as beneficial as any established alternatives;
5. The improvement must be attainable outside the investigational setting.
Medical Necessity means that health care services (e.g., procedures, treatments, supplies, devices, equipment, facilities or drugs) that a
physician, exercising prudent clinical judgment, would provide to a patient for the purpose of preventing, evaluating, diagnosing or treating
an illness, injury or disease or its symptoms, and that are:
1. In accordance with generally accepted standards of medical practice; and
2. Clinically appropriate in terms of type, frequency, extent, site and duration and considered effective for the patient’s illness, injury or
disease; and
3. Not primarily for the convenience of the patient, physician or other health care provider; and
4. Not more costly than an alternative service or sequence of services at least as likely to produce equivalent therapeutic or diagnostic results
as to the diagnosis or treatment of that patient’s illness, injury or disease.
 