 
Page 1 of 7 
Clinical Policy: Aripiprazole Long-Acting Injections (Abilify Maintena, 
Aristada, Aristada Initio ) 
Reference Number: CP.PHAR.290 
Effective Date: 12.01.16  
Last Review Date: 08.22  
Line of Business:  HIM, Medicaid   
 
Coding Implications   
Revision Log  
 
See Important Reminder  at the end of this policy for important regulatory and legal 
information.  
 
Description  
Aripiprazole monohydrate (Abilify Maintena®) and aripiprazole lauroxil (Aristada®, Aristada 
Initio™) are atypical antipsychotics. 
 
FDA Approved Indication(s) 
Abilify Maintena is indicated:  
 For the treatment of schizophrenia in adults  
 For maintenance monotherapy treatment of bipolar I disorder in adults  
 
Aristada is indicated:  
 For the treatment of schizophrenia in adults 
 
Aristada Initio, in combination with oral aripiprazole, is indicated: 
 For the initiation of Aristada when used for the treatment of schizophrenia in adults 
 
Policy/Criteria 
Provider must submit documentation (such as office chart notes, lab results or other clinical 
information) supporting that member has met all approval criteria.  
 
It is the policy of health plans affiliated with Centene Corporation® that Abilify Maintena, 
Aristada, and Aristada Initio are  medically necessary  when the following criteria are met:  
 
I. Initial Approval Criteria  
A. Schizophrenia (must meet all) :  
1. Diagnosis of schizophrenia; 
2. Prescribed by or in consultation with a psychiatrist;  
3. Age ≥ 18 years;  
4. Member meets one of the following (a or b):  
a. History of non-adherence to oral antipsychotic therapy ( see Appendix D for 
examples) and has established tolerability to oral aripiprazole;  
b. Therapy was initiated in an inpatient setting during a recent (within 60 days) 
hospital admission;  
5. Dose does not exceed the following (a, b or c): 
a. Abilify Maintena: 400 mg per month; 
b. Aristada: 882 mg per month, 882 mg per 6 weeks, or 1,064 mg per 2 months; CLINICAL POLICY 
Aripiprazole Long-Acting Injections  
Page 2 of 7 
c. Aristada Initio: 675 mg one-time dose (used in conjunction with Aristada and an 
oral one-time 30 mg dose of aripiprazole) . 
Approval duration: 6 months  
 
B. Bipolar Disorder (must meet all) : 
1. Diagnosis of bipolar disorder;  
2. Request is for Abilify Maintena;  
3. Prescribed by or in consultation with a psychiatrist;  
4. Age ≥ 18 years;  
5. Member meets one of the following (a or b):  
a. History of non-adherence to oral antipsychotic therapy ( see Appendix D for 
examples) and has established tolerability to oral aripiprazole;  
b. Therapy was initiated in an inpatient setting during a recent (within 60 days) 
hospital admission;  
6. Dose does not exceed 400 mg per month.  
Approval duration: 6 months   
 
C. Other diagnoses/indications   
1. Refer to the off-label use policy for the relevant line of business if diagnosis is NOT 
specifically listed under section III (Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is 
NOT authorized): CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid and HIM.PA.154 for health insurance 
marketplace.  
 
II. Continued Therapy 
A. All Indications in Section I (must meet all) :  
1. Currently receiving medication via Centene benefit, or documentation supports one of 
the following (a or b): 
a. Member is currently receiving the requested agent for a covered indication and 
has received this medication for at least 30 days; 
b. Therapy was initiated in an inpatient setting for a covered indication during a 
recent (within 60 days) hospital admission; 
2. Member is responding positively to therapy;  
3. If request is for a dose increase, new dose does not exceed the following (a or b): 
a. Abilify Maintena: 400 mg per month; 
b. Aristada: 882 mg per month, 882 mg per 6 weeks, or 1,064 mg per 2 months. 
Approval duration: 12 months  
 
B. Other diagnoses/indications (must meet 1 or 2) : 
1. Currently receiving medication via Centene benefit and documentation supports 
positive response to therapy.   
Approval duration:  Duration of request or 6 months (whichever is less) ; or 
2. Refer to the off-label use policy for the relevant line of business if diagnosis is NOT 
specifically listed under section III (Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is 
NOT authorized): CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid and HIM.PA.154 for health insurance 
marketplace . 
 CLINICAL POLICY 
Aripiprazole Long-Acting Injections  
Page 3 of 7 
III. Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized:  
A. Non-FDA approved indications, which are not addressed in this policy, unless there is 
sufficient documentation of efficacy and safety according to the off label use policies –
CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid and HIM.PA.154 for health insurance marketplace, or evidence 
of coverage documents;  
B. Dementia-related psychosis. 
 
IV. Appendices/General Information 
Appendix A: Abbreviation/Acronym Key 
FDA: Food and Drug Administration 
 
Appendix B: Therapeutic Alternatives  
This table provides a listing of preferred alternative therapy recommended in the approval 
criteria. The drugs listed here may not be a formulary agent for all relevant lines of business 
and may require prior authorization. 
Drug Name  Dosing Regimen Dose Limit/ 
Maximum Dose 
aripiprazole 
(Abilify) Bipolar Disorder and Schizophrenia 
Adults: 10-15 mg PO QD 30 mg/day 
Therapeutic alternatives are listed as Brand name® (generic) when the drug is available by brand name only 
and generic (Brand name®) when the drug is available by both brand and generic. 
 
Appendix C: Contraindications / Boxed warnings 
 Contraindication(s): known hypersensitivity to aripiprazole 
 Boxed warning(s): Increased mortality in elderly patients with dementia-related 
psychosis. 
 
Appendix D: Examples of Oral Antipsychotics – Generic (Brand) 
Typical/First Generation 
Antipsychotics † Atypical/Second Generation 
Antipsychotics 
 Chlorpromazine (Thorazine) 
 Fluphenazine (Prolixin) 
 Haloperidol (Haldol) 
 Loxapine (Loxitane) 
 Perphenazine (Trilafon) 
 Pimozide (Orap) 
 Thioridazine (Mellaril) 
 Thiothixene (Navane) 
 Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)  Aripiprazole (Abilify)* 
 Asenapine maleate (Saphris) 
 Brexpiprazole (Rexulti) 
 Cariprazine (Vraylar) 
 Clozapine (Clozaril) 
 Iloperidone (Fanapt) 
 Lumateperone (Caplyta) 
 Lurasidone (Latuda) 
 Olanzapine (Zyprexa)* 
 Olanzapine/fluoxetine (Symbyax) 
 Paliperidone (Invega)* 
 Quetiapine (Seroquel) 
 Risperidone (Risperdal)* 
 Ziprasidone (Geodon)  
†Most typical/first generation antipsychotics are available only as generics in the U.S. 
*Long-acting injectable formulation available  CLINICAL POLICY 
Aripiprazole Long-Acting Injections  
Page 4 of 7 
 
V. Dosage and Administration  
Drug Name Indication Dosing Regimen Maximum 
Dose 
Aripiprazole 
monohydrate 
(Abilify 
Maintena) Schizophrenia  The recommended starting and 
maintenance dose is 400 mg IM monthly 
(no sooner than 26 days after the 
previous injection). Dose can be reduced 
to 300 mg in patients with adverse 
reactions.  
 Used in combination with oral 
aripiprazole for the first 14 consecutive 
days. 
 Known CYP2D6 poor metabolizers: 
Recommended starting and 
maintenance dose is 300 mg IM 
monthly as a single injection.  400 mg/month 
Bipolar I 
disorder 
Aripiprazole 
lauroxil 
(Aristada) Schizophrenia  Initiation Method 1:   
Administer one IM injection of Aristada 
Initio 675 mg (deltoid or gluteal muscle) 
and one dose of oral aripiprazole 30mg in 
conjunction with the first Aristada 
injection.  
 First Aristada injection may be started 
on same day or up to 10 days after 
administration of Aristada Initio 
 Avoid injection of both Aristada and 
Aristada Initio into the same deltoid or 
gluteal muscle. 
 
Initiation Method 2:  
Used in combination with oral 
aripiprazole for the first 21 consecutive 
days. 
 
Depending on individual patient’s needs, 
treatment can be initiated at a dose of 441 
mg, 662 mg, or 882 mg IM administered 
monthly; 882 mg administered every 6 
weeks; or 1064 mg administered every 2 
months. 
 
Dose adjustments are required for 1) 
known CYP2D6 poor metabolizers and 
2) for patients taking CYP3A4 inhibitors, 882 mg/month CLINICAL POLICY 
Aripiprazole Long-Acting Injections  
Page 5 of 7 
Drug Name Indication Dosing Regimen Maximum 
Dose 
CYP2D6 inhibitors, or CYP3A4 inducers 
for more than 2 weeks.  
Aripiprazole 
lauroxil 
(Aristada 
Initio) Schizophrenia 
(therapy 
initiation 
only) Single dose of 675 mg IM injection, in 
combination with a single dose of 30 mg 
oral aripiprazole, to initiate Aristada 
treatment or to re-initiate Aristada 
treatment. Aristada may be started at the 
same time or within 10 days of Aristada 
Initio/oral aripiprazole.  675 mg once 
 
VI. Product Availability   
Drug Name Availability 
Aripiprazole monohydrate 
(Abilify Maintena) Extended-release powder for suspension for injection (single-
dose pre-filled dual chamber syringe and single-dose vial): 
300 mg and 400 mg  
Aripiprazole lauroxil 
(Aristada) Extended-release injectable suspension (single-use pre-filled 
syringe): 441 mg/1.6 mL, 662 mg/2.4 mL, 882 mg/3.2 mL or 
1,064 mg/3.9 mL 
Aripiprazole lauroxil 
(Aristada Initio)  Extended-release injectable suspension (single-use pre-filled 
syringe): 675 mg/2.4 mL  
 
VII. References 
1. Abilify Maintena Prescribing Information. Rockville, MD: Otsuka America Pharmaceutical, 
Inc.; January 2020. Available at: 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2020/202971s013lbl.pdf . Accessed 
May 12, 2022. 
2. Aristada Prescribing Information. Waltham, MA: Alkermes, Inc.; February 2020. Available 
at: 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2020/207533s017,209830s005lbl.pdf . 
Accessed May 12, 2022. 
3. Clinical Pharmacology [database online]. Tampa, FL: Gold Standard, Inc.; 2022. Available 
at: http://www.clinicalpharmacology-ip.com/ . Accessed May 12, 2022. 
 
Coding Implications  
Codes referenced in this clinical policy are for informational purposes only.  Inclusion or 
exclusion of any codes does not guarantee coverage.  Providers should reference the most up-to-
date sources of professional coding guidance prior to the submission of claims for 
reimbursement of covered services.  
HCPCS 
Codes  Description 
J0401 Injection, aripiprazole, extended release, 1 mg  
J1943 Injection, aripiprazole lauroxil, (aristada initio), 1 mg  
J1944 Injection, aripiprazole lauroxil, (aristada), 1 mg  
 CLINICAL POLICY 
Aripiprazole Long-Acting Injections  
Page 6 of 7 
Reviews, Revisions, and Approvals Date P&T 
Approval 
Date 
3Q 2018 annual review: no significant changes; references reviewed 
and updated   05.01.18 08.18 
No significant changes: n ew formulation added (Aristada Initio).  07.31.18  
Initial and continued therapy criteria were revised to allow approval 
for members who initiated therapy during a recent inpatient visit, 
without the requirement to step through oral agents.  02.26.19 02.19 
3Q 2019 annual review: no significant changes; added HIM-Medical 
Benefit lines of business; added boxed warning; updated dosage and 
administration in accordance with label changes; references 
reviewed and updated.  05.24.19 08.19 
3Q 2020 annual review: no significant changes; revised HIM-
Medical Benefit to HIM line of business; references reviewed and 
updated. 05.12.20 08.20 
3Q 2021 annual review: no significant changes; updated reference 
for HIM off-label use to HIM.PA.154 (replaces HIM.PHAR.21); 
references reviewed and updated.  03.19.21 08.21 
3Q 2022 annual review: no significant changes; references reviewed 
and updated.  05.12.22 08.22 
 
Important Reminder 
This clinical policy has been developed by appropriately experienced and licensed health care 
professionals based on a review and consideration of currently available generally accepted 
standards of medical practice; peer-reviewed medical literature; government agency/program 
approval status; evidence-based guidelines and positions of leading national health professional 
organizations; views of physicians practicing in relevant clinical areas affected by this clinical 
policy; and other available clinical information. The Health Plan makes no representations and 
accepts no liability with respect to the content of any external information used or relied upon in 
developing this clinical policy. This clinical policy is consistent with standards of medical 
practice current at the time that this clinical policy was approved. “Health Plan” means a health 
plan that has adopted this clinical policy and that is operated or administered, in whole or in part, 
by Centene Management Company, LLC, or any of such health plan’s affiliates, as applicable. 
 
The purpose of this clinical policy is to provide a guide to medical necessity, which is a 
component of the guidelines used to assist in making coverage decisions and administering 
benefits. It does not constitute a contract or guarantee regarding payment or results. Coverage 
decisions and the administration of benefits are subject to all terms, conditions, exclusions and 
limitations of the coverage documents (e.g., evidence of coverage, certificate of coverage, policy, 
contract of insurance, etc.), as well as to state and federal requirements and applicable Health 
Plan-level administrative policies and procedures. 
 
This clinical policy is effective as of the date determined by the Health Plan. The date of posting 
may not be the effective date of this clinical policy. This clinical policy may be subject to 
applicable legal and regulatory requirements relating to provider notification. If there is a CLINICAL POLICY 
Aripiprazole Long-Acting Injections  
Page 7 of 7 
discrepancy between the effective date of this clinical policy and any applicable legal or 
regulatory requirement, the requirements of law and regulation shall govern. The Health Plan 
retains the right to change, amend or withdraw this clinical policy, and additional clinical 
policies may be developed and adopted as needed, at any time.  
 
This clinical policy does not constitute medical advice, medical treatment or medical care.  It is 
not intended to dictate to providers how to practice medicine. Providers are expected to exercise 
professional medical judgment in providing the most appropriate care, and are solely responsible 
for the medical advice and treatment of members.  This clinical policy is not intended to 
recommend treatment for members. Members should consult with their treating physician in 
connection with diagnosis and treatment decisions.  
 
Providers referred to in this clinical policy are independent contractors who exercise independent 
judgment and over whom the Health Plan has no control or right of control.  Providers are not 
agents or employees of the Health Plan. 
 
This clinical policy is the property of the Health Plan. Unauthorized copying, use, and 
distribution of this clinical policy or any information contained herein are strictly prohibited.  
Providers, members and their representatives are bound to the terms and conditions expressed 
herein through the terms of their contracts.  Where no such contract exists, providers, members 
and their representatives agree to be bound by such terms and conditions by providing services to 
members and/or submitting claims for payment for such services. 
 
Note:  
For Medicaid members , when state Medicaid coverage provisions conflict with the coverage 
provisions in this clinical policy, state Medicaid coverage provisions take precedence. Please 
refer to the state Medicaid manual for any coverage provisions pertaining to this clinical policy. 
 
©2016 Centene Corporation. All rights reserved.  All materials are exclusively owned by 
Centene Corporation and are protected by United States copyright law and international 
copyright law.  No part of this publication may be reproduced, copied, modified, distributed, 
displayed, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted in any form or by any means, or otherwise 
published without the prior written permission of Centene Corporation. You may not alter or 
remove any trademark, copyright or other notice contained herein. Centene® and Centene 
Corporation® are registered trademarks exclusively owned by Centene Corporation. 