 
PHARMACY / MEDICAL POLICY – 5.01.522  
Advanced Therapies for Pharmacological Treatment of 
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension  
BCBSA Ref. Policy: 5.01.09  
Effective Date:  July 1 , 2023  
Last Revised:  June 26 , 2023 
Replaces:  5.01.509 and
 5.01.09  RELATED POLICIES:  
5.01.545  Tadalafil Products for Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia  
 
 
Select a hyperlink below to be directed to that section.  
POLICY CRITERIA   |  DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS   |  CODING  
RELATED INFORMATION   |  EVIDENCE REVIEW   |  REFERENCES   |  HISTORY  
∞ Clicking this icon returns you to the hyperlinks menu above.  
 
Introduction  
High blood pressur e within the arteries that go to the lungs  is known a s pulmonary arterial 
hypertension . With this condition, the small arteries in the lungs become narrow or are 
completely blocked. Because it’s difficult for blood to travel through them, the blood pressure in 
the lungs increases. The heart has to work harde r to push blood through those arteries. This can 
lead to a weakened heart muscle and eventually heart failure. Treatmen t depends on the 
underlying cause of the high blood pressure and the severity of symptoms. There are several different drugs that can be used to manage the condition. Some drugs open narrowed blood 
vessels, others help relax the blood vessel walls, while yet others act on a specific substance in the walls of blood vessels. This policy describes when specific medications for pulmonary arteri al 
hypertension may be considered medically necessary.  
 
Note:    The Introduction section is for your general knowledg e and is not to be taken  as policy coverage criteria . The 
rest of the policy uses specific words and concepts familiar to medical professionals. It is intend ed for 
providers . A provider can be a person, such as a doctor, nurse, psycholog ist, or dentist. A provider also can 
be a place where medical care is given, l ike a hospital, clinic, or lab.  This policy informs them about when a 
service may be covered.  
 
5.01.522_PBC (06-26-2023)
 
 
   
 
 
   
Page | 2 of 53  ∞ Policy Coverage Criteria   
 
Therapy  Medical Necessity  
Treatment of pulmonary 
arterial hypertension  Combination therapy for the treatment of pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH/ WHO Group 1) may be considered 
medically necessary when ALL of the following conditions are 
met: 
• Individual s have failed to demonstrate an adequate response to 
a single medication  
AND  
• Medications are fro m different therapeutic classes  
AND  
• Each medication may be considered medically necessary for the treatment of PAH  
 
Combination therapy with tadalafil and ambrisentan as first -
line treatment may be considered medically necessary f or 
treatment naïve PAH individual s who have WHO Functional 
Class Groups II and III disease.  
 
The following therapies may be considered medically 
necessary for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH/ WHO Group 1):  
• Phosphodiesterase -5 enzyme inhibitor s 
o Adcirca®  (tadalafil ) (oral)  
o Alyq™ (tadalafil) (oral) ; generic of Adcirca®  
o Revatio® (sildenafil) (oral)  
o Sildenafil 20 mg  tablet  (oral) ; generic of Revatio®  
o Tadalafil 20 mg  tablet  (oral); generic of  Adcirca®  
o Tadliq® (tadalafil) 20 mg/5 mL (oral suspension)  
o Liqrev® (sildenafil) 10 mg/mL (oral suspension)  
• Soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) stimulator s 
o Adempas® (riociguat) (oral)  
• Prostacyclin s 
o Flolan® (epoprostenol)  (IV infusion)  
o Orenitram ® (treprostinil) (oral)  Page | 3 of 53  ∞ Therapy  Medical Necessity  
o Remodulin® ( treprostinil) (SC infusion, IV infusion)  
o Treprostinil (SC infusion, IV infusion)  
o Tyvaso® (treprostinil) (inhalation  solution  via nebulizer)  
o Tyvaso DPI ™ (treprostinil) (inhalation via dry powder)  
o Uptravi® (selexipag) (oral , IV infusion) 
o Veletri® (epoprosten ol) (IV infusion)  
o Ventavis® (iloprost) ( inhalation via nebulizer)  
• Endothelin rec eptor antagonists  
o Ambrisentan (oral)  
o Bosentan (oral)  
o Letairis®  (ambrisentan) (oral)  
o Opsumit® (macitentan) (oral)  
o Tracleer® (bosentan) (oral)  
 
Use of Adcirca® (tadalafil 20 mg), Alyq ™ (tadalafil 20 mg) , 
Revatio ® (sildenafil 20  mg; sildenafil 10  mg/ml ), sildenafil 20 
mg tablet  (generic of Revatio®) , tadalafil 20 mg  tablet  
(generic of Adcirca®) , Tadliq® (tadalafil 20 mg/5 mL ), or 
Liqrev® (sildenafil 10mg/mL ) to treat erectile dysfunction , or 
other uses,  is considered  investigational. 
Treatment of chronic 
thromboembolic 
pulmonary hypertension  Adempas ® (riociguat) may also be considered medically 
necessary for the treatment of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hy pertension (CTEPH/ WHO Group 4) in individual s 
who are not surgical candidates, those who have inoperable 
CTEPH, or those with recurrent or persistent CTEPH after 
surgical treatment.  
 
Therapy  Investigational  
Other advanced therapies  Use of other advanced therapies for the pharmacologic 
treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH/ WHO 
Group 1), includi ng but not limited to Gleevec®  (imatinib) , 
simvastatin, and atorvastatin, is considered investigational.  
Treatment of any other 
conditions  The use of Adempas®  (riociguat) is considered investigational 
for the treatment of any other conditions or subtypes of PH, 
except WHO Groups 1 and 4.  Page | 4 of 53  ∞ Therapy  Investigational  
The use of Tyvaso® (treprostinil)  and Tyvaso DPI ™ 
(treprostinil)  is considered investigational for the tr eatment of 
any other conditions or subtypes of PH, except WHO Groups 1 
and 3. 
Treatment of non -PAH PH 
conditions  The use of Adcirca®  (tadalafil), Alyq ™ (tadalafil) , ambrisentan,  
bosentan,  Flola n® (epoprostenol), Letairis®  (ambrisentan), 
Opsumit® ( macitentan ), Orenitram ® (treprostinil), 
Remodulin® (treprostinil), Revatio® (sildenafil), sildenafil 20 
mg tablet  (generic of Revatio®), tadalafil 20 mg  tablet  
(generic of Adcirca®),  Tadliq® (tadalafil) , Liqrev® (sildenafil), 
Tracleer® (bosentan) , treprost inil, Uptravi® (selexipag) , 
Veletri® (epoprostenol) , Ventavis® (iloprost)  is considered 
investigational for the treatment of non -PAH PH conditions 
(WHO Groups 2 -5), including but not limited to:  
• Pulmonary hypertension associated with left heart diseases  
• Pulmonary hypertension associated with lung diseases and/ or 
hypoxemia (including chronic  obstructive pulmonary disease)  
• Pulmonary hypertension due to chronic th rombotic and/or 
embolic disease  
• Miscellaneous group (sarcoidosis, histiocytosis X and 
lymphangiom atosis)  
 
Length of Approval  
Approval  Criteria  
Initial authorization  All drugs listed in policy may be approved up to 12 months . 
Re-authorization criteria  Future re -authorization of all drugs listed in policy may be 
approved up to 12 months as long as the drug -specific 
coverage criteria are met and chart notes demonstrate that the individual  continues to show a positive clinical response to 
therapy.  
 
Docume ntation Requirements  
The individual ’s medical records submitted for review for all conditions should document 
that medical necessity criteria are met. The record should include the following:  Page | 5 of 53  ∞ Docume ntation Requirements  
• Office visit notes that contain the diagnosis, relevant history, physical evaluation  and 
medication history  
 
Coding   
 
Code  Description  
HCPCS  
J1325  Injection, epoprostenol (Use to report Flolan® and Veletri ®), 0.5 mg  
J3285  Injection, treprostinil  (Remodulin® ), 1 mg  
J3490  Unclassified Drugs (Use to report Uptravi® , Liqrev® ), 
J7686  Treprostinil  (Tyvaso®) , inhalation solution, FDA -approved final product, 
noncompounded, administered through DME, unit dose form, 1.74 mg  
K0455  Infusion pump used for uninterrupted parenteral ad ministration of medication ( e.g. 
epoprostenol or treprostinil)  
Q4074  Iloprost, inhalation solution, FDA -approved final product, noncompounded, 
administered through DME, up to 20 mcg  
Note :  CPT codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighte d by the American Medical Association (AMA). HCPCS 
codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighted by Centers for Medicare Services (CMS).  
 
Related Information   
 
Benefit Application  
Epoprostenol  IV, treprostinil SC/IV , and Uptravi® (selexipag) IV are managed  under  the medical 
benefit .  
Bosentan, ambrisentan, macitentan, riociguat, iloprost, treprostinil  oral/DPI, selexipag, and 
sildenafi l are managed  under  the pharmacy benefit . 
Individual s treated with infusion pumps may require a back -up pump. However, the cost of a 
back-up pump may be included in the home infusion therapy charges or in the HCPCS code ( see 
Coding  section ). Page | 6 of 53  ∞  
Evide nce Review   
 
Description  
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) refers to the presence of abnormally high pulmonary vascular 
pressure.  A subset of individuals is considered to have pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), a 
rare and debilitating disease associated with progressive right ventricular dilation and low 
cardiac output. Several advanced therapies, including prostacyclin analogs, endothelin receptor antagonists, phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors, and a soluble guanylate cyclase stimulat or are available to treat PAH.  Another subset of individuals is considered to have chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH), characterized by residual organized thrombi obstructing the pulmonary vasculature. Most individuals have a history of acute pulmonary 
embolism. Standard treatment for CTEPH is pulmonary endarterectomy. The soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator, riociguat, is the only medication currently U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)‒approved to treat CTEPH.  
For individuals who have PAH and inadequate response to monotherapy who receive add -on 
combination therapy using 2  drug classes FDA approved for treatment of PAH, the evidence 
includes RCTs and meta -analyses. Relevant outcomes  are overall survival, functional outcomes, 
hospitalizations, and treatment -related morbidity. The most recent and  comprehensive meta -
analysis of RCTs was published in 2016. It included 17 RCTs comparing add -on combination  
therapy with monotherapy with at least 12 weeks of follow -up. The m eta-analysis found 
significantly lower rates of clinical  worsening and hospitalizations with add -on combination 
therapy, but mortality rates did not differ significantly between  groups. In all RCTs selected for 
the 2016 meta -analysis, the combination thera py involved different drug combinations  from 
different classes, although the specific combination of riociguat and phosphodiesterase type 5 
inhibitors is  contraindicated. The evidence is sufficient to determine that the technology results 
in an improvement  in the net health  outcome.  
For individuals who have PAH who receive initial combination therapy using 2 drug classes FDA approved for treatment  of PAH, the evidence includes 2 RCTs. Relevant outcomes are overall 
survival, functional outcomes, hospitalizat ions, and  treatment -related morbidity. In the first 
study (AMBITION trial), among individuals in the primary analysis set, there was a  significantly 
lower rate of clinical failure at 6 months in the combination therapy group than in the monotherapy group.  Clinical failure was defined as a complex composite endpoint that included 
death, hospitalizations, functional  improvement, and other measures of disease progression. Page | 7 of 53  ∞ Study limitations include change in enrollment criteria during  the trial and use of a com plex 
composite outcome with multiple components. The other RCT did not find significant 
differences in outcomes between a group receiving initial combination therapy and the group 
receiving monotherapy at 16  weeks; this study had a small sample size and mi ght have been 
underpowered to assess secondary outcomes. Multiple  reviews of the AMBITION trial with an 
emphasis on functional improvement (6MWT) have led to guideline  recommendations for 
making ambrisentan plus tadalafil an appropriate initial treatment o ption. The evidence is 
sufficient  to determine that the technology results in an improvement in the net health 
outcome.  
For individuals who have inoperable CTEPH or PH after surgery who receive a soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator (e.g., riociguat), the evidence includes 1 RCT. Relevant outcomes are overall survival, functional outcomes, hospitalizations, and treatment- related morbidity. The double -
blind RCT found that functional outcomes at 16 weeks improved significantly more in the group 
receiving rioc iguat than placebo. Both groups had a high proportion of adverse events, and 1 
death was attributed to riociguat. In an extension study, the estimated 1 -year survival rate was 
97%. Thirteen deaths occurred, none of which were attributed to study medication . The evidence 
is sufficient to determine that the technology results in an improvement in the net health outcome.  
For individuals who have operable CTEPH who receive perioperative prostacyclin analogues, 
endothelin receptor antagonists, or riociguat, the evidence includes 1 small RCT on bosentan, 
retrospective noncomparative studies on epoprostenol and iloprost, and no trials on riociguat. 
Relevant outcomes are overall survival, functional outcomes, hospitalizations, and treatment-related morbidity. The fe w studies, with small numbers of individual s and limited comparative 
data, do not provide sufficient evidence to determine whether mortality and pulmonary vascular 
resistance are reduced with any of these medications. The evidence is insufficient to determ ine 
that the technology results in an improvement in the net health outcome.  
 
Background  
Pulmonary Hypertension (PH)  
The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies individuals with PH into 5 groups based on the etiology of the condition. These groups differ in their clinical presentation, diagnostic findings, 
and response to treatment.  
 Page | 8 of 53  ∞ Classification  
The 2013 WHO classification of PH, which is based on the consensus of an international group 
of experts at the Fifth  World Symposium on Pulmonary Hyperte nsion, is the most widely used 
system in clinical care and research.  There are  5 WHO categories of PH based on the etiology of 
the pulmonary hypertension:   
• Group 1: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)  
• Group 2: PH due to left heart disease  
• Group 3: PH due  to chronic lung disease and/or hypoxemia  
• Group 4: PH due to chronic thromboembolic disease (chronic thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension [CTEPH])  
• Group 5: PH due to mixed or uncertain causes.  
For each category, there are numerous subcategories indicating more specific disease etiologies. 
For example, in WHO  group 1, the most common subcategory is idiopathic PAH, which is a 
disorder of unknown etiology categorized by  abnormal proliferation of blood vessels in the 
pulmonary arterial system. Other classification systems, such as those  developed by the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation and American Heart Association, are very similar but have  differences in the subcategories of group 1.  
 
Disease Description  
Pulmonary hypertensio n is defined as increased arterial pressure in the lung vasculature. 
Increased pulmonary pressure can be caused by primary abnormalities in the pulmonary 
vascular system; it can also be caused by other abnormalities in the cardiac or pulmonary 
organs, whic h may lead to secondary elevations in pulmonary arterial pressure. A definitive 
diagnosis of PH is usually made following measurement of pulmonary arterial pressure by right 
heart catheterization. A pulmonary arterial pressure of at least 25 mmHg confirms the diagnosis.  
Clinical symptoms of PH are related to right- sided heart failure and impaired oxygen delivery by 
the lungs. Warning signs are nonspecific but often present as a constellation of symptoms including dyspnea on exertion, fatigue, weakness, and syncope. High pulmonary pressures lead 
to increased work of the right ventricle. This chronic hemodynamic overload leads to low cardiac output and progressive right ventricular dilatation. In advanced disease, signs of right- sided 
heart failure occur (e.g. , abdominal distension, hepatic congestion, pedal edema). Without Page | 9 of 53  ∞ treatment, the disease is progressive and eventually fatal; however, the natural history and 
rapidity of progression is variable. Premature death most commonly results from complications 
of right heart failure.  
There are also differences in the pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, and natural history of 
each PH category. Only categories relevant to this evidence review (WHO groups 1 [PAH] and 4 
[CTEPH]) are discussed herein.  
The WHO furt her classifies individuals with pulmonary hypertension based on functional ability:  
• Class I: No limitations with ordinary physical activity  
• Class II: Ordinary physical activity results in symptoms. Comfortable at rest.  
• Class III: Less than ordinary physica l activity results in symptoms. Comfortable at rest.  
• Class IV: Inability to perform any physical activity without symptoms. Symptoms present at 
rest. 
 
Medical Management of PAH  
Conventional therapies considered in all individuals with PH regardless of etiology include 
medications to treat heart failure  (diuretics, angiotensin -converting enzyme inhibitors or 
angiotensin receptor blockers, digoxin), oxygen therapy, and  exercise. Lung transplantation and 
combined heart -lung transplantation have been performed in individual s with PH that is  
refractory to medical management. There are also specific therapies for each WHO group. For 
example, anticoagulation  is a treatment option in WHO groups 1 and 4, and both 
anticoagulation and surgical thrombectomy are treatmen t options  for appropriate individuals in 
group 4.  
Advanced pharmacologic therapies for PH are defined as newer specialty pharmacy drugs specifically intended to impact  the natural history of PH, rather than treat disease 
manifestations. These specialty dru gs can be administered as single agents or in various 
combinations. Advanced pharmacologic therapies are FDA approved  for treatment of PH groups 
1 and 4.  
 Page | 10  of 53  ∞ Chronic Thromboembolic PH  
Disease Description  
CTEPH primarily occurs after acute or chronic pulmonary embolism. Progressive pulmonary 
vascular remodeling (thrombi organization, fibrous stenosis, and microvascular changes) 
obstructs pulmonary arteries, leading to PH and right heart failure . Estimated CTEPH incidence 
among individual s who survive a n acute pulmonary embolism ranges from 0.6% to 3.8%. 
However, many individual s have no clinical history of pulmonary embolism, and CTEPH is likely 
underdiagnosed. Additional risk factors include splenectomy, chronic inflammatory states, and hypercoagulabil ity due to the presence of anticardiolipin antibody or elevated factor VIII levels. 
Diagnosis is made by ventilation- perfusion scan showing large areas of mismatch (segmental or 
larger). Pulmonary angiography confirms the diagnosis and indicates operabilit y (i.e., the extent 
of proximal and distal disease).  
 
Hemodynamic Derangement  
CTEPH is characterized by a mean pulmonary artery pressure greater than 25 mm Hg. European 
guidelines also require pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 15 mm Hg or less and PVR greater than 2 Wood units. In individuals with poor hemodynamics ( e.g., pulmonary artery 
pressure >50 mm Hg) who are eligible for pulmonary endarterectomy, pretreatment with intravenous epoprostenol is recommended to improve surgical outcomes.  
 
Medical Man agement of CTEPH  
Individual s with CTEPH are treated with diuretics and oxygen as needed and with extended or 
lifelong anticoagulant therapy. Eligible individual s undergo pulmonary endarterectomy, which 
may be curative. Current guidelines recommend medical treatment using PAH therapies when 
pulmonary endarterectomy is contraindicated (due to significant distal disease or comorbidity) 
and when pulmonary artery pressures remain elevated after pulmonary endarterectomy (due to 
residual distal pathology).  
The onl y medication currently FDA -approved for treatment of CTEPH is riociguat. Riociguat is a 
first-in-class oral soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator. Riociguat stimulates soluble guanylate 
cyclase both directly and indirectly, by increasing sensitivity of the enzyme to nitric oxide. Thus, 
riociguat may be effective in conditions in which endogenous nitric oxide (a vasodilator) is depleted.  Page | 11  of 53  ∞  
Rationale  
Research Issues  
Editorial critiques of the available literature have raised questions about the study endpoints  
selected, which are often short -term measures that are insufficient for addressing the 
mechanism of disease, optimizing treatment by individual population, and making meaningful 
comparisons between therapies. Studies are short in duration and compare outc omes that 
reflect symptomatic improvement ( e.g., 6-minute walk distance or functional class) but not 
disease status (such as vasculature remodeling) or survival. Studies also need to address the 
durability of these outcomes. However, designing long- term (1  year or more) studies with 
survival as an endpoint may raise additional issues, including potential ethical questions.  
Additionally, some authors have questioned the utility of the 6 -minute walk distance (6MWD) as 
an intermediate clinical outcome in therapeutic pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) trials. It is 
unclear whether change in 6MWD is associated with clinical outcomes ( e.g., death, lung 
transplantation, hospitalization due to worsening PAH, or worsening right heart failure), or 
whether there is a threshold above and below at which risk for adverse outcomes substantially 
changes. Two groups attempted to validate the 6MWD and to define a minimal important 
difference (MID) using different methods. Gabler et al. examined correlations between 6MWD 
and clinical events in order to establish a threshold that would indicate a significant change in 
the probability of such events. A significant threshold effect was observed at 41.8 meters. However, the authors noted that “change in 6MWD does not explain a la rge proportion of the 
treatment effect, has only modest validity as a surrogate end point for clinical events, and may not be a sufficient surrogate end point.” Mathai and colleagues used anchor - and distribution -
based methods and reported MIDs of 38.6 met ers and 25.1 -38.5 meters, respectively. The mean 
of these values was 33 meters, which the authors considered a consensus MID. A 2012 meta -
analysis of 22 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that assessed 6MWD in individual s with PAH 
and reported clinical outcomes found no relationship between changes in 6WMD and clinical outcomes. All 3 of these analyses were based on trials of short duration ( e.g., 12 weeks) and in 
treatment -naïve individuals; it may be that the utility of  the 6MWD is limited to such trials.  
 Page | 12  of 53  ∞ PAH Monotherapy Using Prostanoids, Endothelin -Receptor Antagonists or 
Phosphodiesterase Type -5 (PDE5) Inhibitors, or a Soluble Guanylate 
Cyclase Stimulator (Riociguat)  
Several meta -analyses that pool the findings of studies evaluating the efficacy of PAH 
treatments have been published. In 2013, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ) published a comparative effectiveness review of the screening, mana gement, and 
treatments of PAH.  McCrory et al. searched the literature through July 2012 using broad 
inclusion criteria (diagnosis of PAH in individual s of any age; RCTs or observational studies; all 
sample sizes). They identified 27 RCTs (3,587 individuals) and 9 observational studies that 
evaluated the comparat ive effectiveness and safety of monotherapy or combination therapy for 
PAH. Data from the observational studies was considered unusable. Twenty -two RCTs compared 
a single drug ( i.e., monotherapy) to placebo or standard therapy, defined as supportive 
treatm ent (diuretics, oxygen, digoxin, and/or oral anticoagulants) with or without calcium 
channel blockers (CCBs); 8 studied prostanoids, 8 studied endothelin -receptor antagonists, and 
6 studied PDE5 inhibitors. All individual s were adults. Median trial duratio n was 12 weeks (range 
4-24). Based on low strength of evidence, prostanoids were associated with lower mortality 
compared with standard therapy/placebo (odds ratio [OR]: 0.52 [95% confidence interval (CI): 
0.29- 0.95]). Evidence for endothelin receptor anta gonists and PDE5 inhibitors was insufficient to 
form a conclusion for this outcome. Moderate strength of evidence for each drug class supported an association with improved 6 -minute walk distance (6MWD); treatment effects 
(mean difference in distance walked, intervention – standard therapy/placebo) were 27.9 meters 
(95% CI: 10.3- 45.4) for prostanoids, 39.9 meters (95% CI: 21.4- 58.4) for endothelin -receptor 
inhibitors, and 38.9 meters (95% CI: 22.0- 55.9) for PDE5 inhibitors. Endothelin -receptor 
antagonists a nd PDE5 inhibitors were associated with lower incidences of hospitalization based 
on moderate strength of evidence for each drug class; ORs were 0.34 (95% CI: 0.17 - 0.69) and 
38.9 (95% CI: 22.0- 55.9). Evidence for prostanoids was insufficient to form a co nclusion for this 
outcome. Low strength of evidence for each drug class supported an association with improvements in most hemodynamic measures (pulmonary vascular resistance [PVR], mean 
pulmonary artery pressure, and cardiac index). However, the clinical significance of the observed 
treatment effect magnitudes is unclear. Among commonly reported adverse events, high strength of evidence supported a greater incidence of jaw pain and cough with aerosolized 
prostanoid than with placebo. Moderate strength of e vidence supported a greater incidence of 
headache and flushing with PDE5 inhibitors compared with standard therapy/placebo. The 
incidence of flushing was greater with aerosolized prostanoids than with standard therapy/placebo, based on moderate strength of  evidence.  Page | 13  of 53  ∞ A 2013 Cochrane review by Liu et al. assessed the efficacy of endothelin receptor antagonists for 
the treatment of individuals with PAH.  A literature search through December 2011 identified 12 
RCTs (1,471 individual s), 11 of which were placebo c ontrolled. The 12th RCT was a head -to-head 
comparison of bosentan and sildenafil in 26 individual s. Seven of 12 trials assessing bosentan 
comprised 38% of the total individual sample, 2 trials assessing ambrisentan comprised 27%, 
and 3 trials assessing sit axsentan comprised 35%. Sitaxsentan is a selective endothelin receptor 
antagonist (like ambrisentan) that was withdrawn worldwide in 2010 due to fatal hepatotoxicity. Pooled results showed improved outcomes with endothelin -receptor antagonists compared to 
placebo in 6MWD (mean difference 33.7 meters [95% CI: 24.9 -42.5]), proportion of individuals 
with improved WHO or NYHA functional class (OR: 1.6 [95% CI: 1.2 -2.1]), proportion of 
individuals with deteriorated functional class (OR: 0.3 [95% CI: 0.2 -0.4]), a nd hemodynamic 
parameters (mean pulmonary artery pressure, pulmonary vascular resistance, and cardiac index). Based on 22 events in 1,201 individual s, the reduction in mortality with endothelin receptor 
antagonists was not statistically significant (OR: 0. 57 [95% CI: 0.26, 1.24]).  
In 2009, Galie et al. in Italy published a meta -analysis of RCTs exa mining approved medications 
i.e., prostanoids, endothelin -receptor antagonists, and PDE 5 inhibitors for treating PAH.  The 
primary analysis included only studies w ith a placebo -comparator arm; a sensitivity analysis also 
included studies comparing 2 active treatment arms. The main outcome measure was all -cause 
mortality. Twenty -one trials were included in the primary analysis (n=3,140), and 2 additional 
studies (n=5 9) were included in the sensitivity analysis. The average  duration of the trials was 
14.3 weeks. All -cause mortality rate in the control group was 3.8%. Active treatments were 
associated with a reduction in mortality of 43%; the sensitivity analysis confirmed a reduction in 
mortality of 38%. The authors concluded that the results of this meta -analysis suggest an 
improvement of survival in the individuals treated with the targeted therapies approved for PAH. 
The limitations of the meta -analysis include the prolo nged period of time between the first and 
last RCT (about 18 years), the different duration of the trials (ranging from 8 –36 weeks), the lack 
of blinding in some studies, the pooling of multiple active treatment arms, and potential 
heterogeneity in the con duct of the trials. The meta -analysis included studies with compounds 
that were eventually not approved because of lack of efficacy and different doses of approved therapies that were not approved because they were less effective or had increased adverse effects.  
Two meta -analyses published in 2010, were similar in scope and design to the 2009  meta -
analysis by Galie et al.  All 3 were limited to RCTs in individual s with PAH, had all -cause mortality 
as the primary outcome and evaluated the same classes of med ications, prostanoids, 
endothelin -receptor antagonists, and PDE5 inhibitors. Ryerson and colleagues searched the 
literature through November 2009.  Their eligibility criteria included RCTs in adults with PAH, and 
they further required that studies have a fo llow-up of at least 8 weeks, be double- blind, and be Page | 14  of 53  ∞ placebo -controlled (except for studies on intravenous [IV] medication use). They included both 
studies that compared one medication to placebo (monotherapy), as well as studies that added 
a second medica tion versus placebo to a baseline medication (combined treatment); the latter 
were categorized by the class of the medication in the study that was under investigation. 
Twenty -four trials met the inclusion criteria. This included 11 on prostanoids, 8 on en dothelin -
receptor antagonists, and 3 on PDE5 inhibitors. The investigators did not pool studies across 
classes of medications. There was a statistically significant reduction in all- cause mortality in a 
meta -analysis of the studies on prostanoids, but not studies on endothelin -receptor antagonists, 
or PDE5 inhibitors. The pooled analysis of prostanoid trials found a 51% mortality reduction 
(95% confidence interval [CI]: 18 -71%). Meta -analyses of each of the 3 classes of medication 
found statistically signif icant improvement in exercise capacity, the primary outcome in most of 
the studies. In pooled analyses, prostanoids were associated with a mean placebo -corrected 
improvement in 6 -minute walk distance of 29 meters (95% CI: 18 -41 meters), endothelin -
receptor  antagonists were associated with improvement of 38 meters (95% CI: 27 to 49 meters), 
and PDE5 inhibitors were associated with an improvement of 34 meters (95% CI: 23 -49 meters).  
The other 2010 meta -analysis, by Macchia et al., searched the literature thro ugh April 2009 and, 
like the Ryerson et al. study, inc luded RCTs on adults with PAH.  However, in this study, both 
open and blinded trials were included, and eligibility was not limited by type of control group (e.g. placebo). Combination medication studies  were treated in the same manner as in Ryerson 
et al., discussed above. Twenty -six trials met eligibility criteria. Of these, 9 were on prostanoids, 8 
on endothelin -receptor antagonists, and 8 on PDE5 inhibitors. In a meta -analysis of studies on 
all 3 clas ses of medications combined (23 studies), there was a statistically significant reduction 
in total mortality of 39% (2 -62%) in the treatment group compared to controls. However, when 
studies on each class of medication were examined separately, there were no significant 
reductions in mortality. For example, the pooled analysis of studies on prostanoids found a nonsignificant 34% reduction in mortality; the 95% confidence interval was consistent with a 64% decrease in mortality to a 21% increase. The mortali ty reduction seemed confined to 
studies with more seriously ill study populations. With all classes of medication combined, there 
was a significant reduction in all- cause mortality when findings from trials with a median 
mortality of above 2% were pooled; mortality reduction was 49% (95% CI: 12 -70%). There was 
no significant reduction in mortality in studies that had lower mortality rates. In addition, there 
was a significant mortality reduction in studies that included individuals with functional class IV 
(42%, 95% CI: 4 -65%) but not studies that excluded these individuals. The authors also pooled 
study findings on change in exercise capacity and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). They 
found small but statistically significant improvement in exercise capa city and PVR. This was true 
for analyses pooling all studies, as well as those limited to one class of medication. For example, 
a pooled analysis of endothelin -receptor antagonists found a mean increase in the 6 -minute Page | 15  of 53  ∞ walk distance of 46 meters (95% CI: 3 8-54 meters) with treatment versus control. A meta -
analysis of prostanoid studies found a mean fall in PVR of 4.24 mm Hg (95% CI: fall of 3.49 -5.00 
mm).  
The all -cause mortality reduction with all medications combined in the Macchia et al. (2010) 
meta -analy sis, 39%, is similar to that f ound by Galie et al. (2009), 43%. Macchia and colleagues, 
however, urge caution when interpreting this finding, since none of the individual classes of 
medication were found to reduce mortality. Moreover, they question the val idity of combining 
studies of pharmacologic treatments that have completely different modes of action and suggest that the finding of mortality reduction be tested in prospective clinical trials.  
Representative randomized trials and observational studies e valuating specific medications are 
described below.  
 
Epoprostenol  
The original approval of epoprostenol from the FDA was based on a 12 -week trial of 81 
individuals with New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III or Class IV primary pulmonary 
hypertension who were randomized to receive either epoprostenol or con ventional medical 
management.  As compared to conventional therapy, the continuous intravenous infusion of  
epoprostenol produced symptomatic and hemodynamic improvement, as well as improved survival in individuals with severe primary pulmonary hypertension. In 1998, McLaughlin and colleagues reported on a case series of 27 individual s treated with epoprostenol  who were 
followed up for a mean of 16 months. All individuals had improvements in symptoms such as 
NYHA classification and exercise duration. While pulmonary vascular resistance declined only 23% acutely in response to a test dose of adenosine (another va sodilator), over long -term 
follow -up the vascular resistance fell by 53%. These results suggest that the beneficial effects of 
epoprostenol are not solely related to vasodilation but perhaps are related to anticoagulant and 
endothelial cytoprotective effec ts. McLaughlin and colleagues subsequently reported survival 
data fo r those receiving epoprostenol.  A total of 162 consecutive individuals diagnosed with 
primary pulmonary hypertension (PHTN) were treated with epoprostenol and followed up for a 
mean of 36.3 months. Observed survival at 1, 2, and 3 years was 87.8%, 76.3%, and 62.8%, which 
was significantly greater than the expected survival of 58.9%, 46.3%, and 35.4%, all respectively, 
based on historical controls.  
In 2000, epoprostenol received additional F DA approval as a treatment for pulmonary 
hypertension (PH) associated with the scleroderma spectrum of disease, based in part on the following data. Humbert et al. reported on an uncontrolled case series of epoprostenol in 17 Page | 16  of 53  ∞ individuals with PHTN associat ed with either scleroderma, CREST syndrome, systemic lupus 
erythematosu s (SLE), or Sjogren’s syndrome.  Individual s were followed up from 14 to 154 weeks. 
After 6 weeks, exercise capacity improved in 15 of 17 individuals; the remaining 2 individuals 
died of  pulmonary edema or sepsis. During the long- term follow -up, an additional 5 individual s 
died, 2 individual s underwent successful lung transplantation, and 7 of the remaining 8 
individuals had a persistent clinical improvement. Badesch and colleagues report ed on a study 
that randomized 111 individuals with pulmonary hypertension (PH) related to scleroderma to 
receive either conventional therapy or conventional therapy in ad dition to epoprostenol therapy.  
The primary outcome measure was exercise capacity. A significant improvement in exercise 
capacity was noted in the epoprostenol group compared to the control group, for whom 
exercise capacity actually decreased. Cardiopulmonary hemodynamics also improved 
significantly in the treatment group compared to the control group. A total of 38% of individuals in the treatment group reported improvements in NYHA classification, compared to none in the control group. Four deaths occurred in the epoprostenol group com pared to 5 in the control 
group, although it should be noted that the study was not adequately powered to detect a significant difference in survival.  
Rosenzweig et al. reported on a case series of 20 individuals with PH secondary to congenital 
heart disea se who had failed to improve clinically with co nventional therapy.  Although none of 
the individuals experienced a decrease in pulmonary artery pressure in response to 
epoprostenol infusion, long -term therapy was associated with a 21% reduction in pulmonary  
artery pressure. In addition, NYHA classification improved from a mean of 3.2 to 2.0. A nonsignificant increase occurred in exercise capacity.  Treatment with Flolan® (epoprostenol) 
and Veletri ® (epoprostenol)  requires 3 steps as follows:  
• Initial dose -ranging study, which is typically performed as an inpatient. The pulmonary 
capillary wedge pressure is monitored, and the infusion rate of the drug is increased until 
dose -limiting pharmacologic effect such as nausea, vomiting, or headache is elicited. Some 
practitioners may consider the initial dose -ranging study optional.  
• Insertion of central venous catheter and attachment to portable infusion pump. Since rebound pulmonary hypertension may recur if the drug is abruptly withdrawn, the drug labeling advises tha t all individual s should have access to a backup infusion pump and 
intravenous infusion set.  
• Ongoing maintenance of portable infusion pump and treatment of complications related to the pump. Complications include catheter thrombosis, sepsis, and pump malfunction. In the 
clinical trials, a cold pouch and frozen gel packs were used to facilitate extended use at 
ambient temperatures.  Page | 17  of 53  ∞ Treatment with iloprost requires the use of a specialized dispensing device.  
For combination treatment, riociguat should not be combined with a phosphodiesterase type 5 
inhibitor (sildenafil, tadalafil, or vardenafil).  
 
Remodulin®  (treprostinil) 
Infused  
The FDA approval of Remodulin® (treprostinil)  was based in part on 2 randomized, placebo -
controlled double -blind studies of subcut aneous infusion of treprostinil in 470 individuals with 
PAH, either idiopathic or associated with connective tissue disease or congenital systemic -to-
pulmonary shunts and a subgroup analysis of 90 individuals with PAH associated with 
connective tissue dise ase. Endpoints, measured at 12 weeks, included exercise capacity (as 
measured by the 6 -minute walk test [6MWT]), dyspnea, and hemodynamic effects. There was a 
median 16 -meter improvement in the 6MWT, which although statistically significant was not as 
great as that noted for epoprostenol. Individual s who were more compromised at baseline had 
the greatest improvements, and thus the lower median improvement may be related to the 
inclusion of less severe individual s (i.e., Class II) in this trial. There were n o statistically significant 
differences in pretreatment and post -treatment hemodynamic variables between individual s 
with different connective tissue diseases.  
A cohort study of long -term survival was identified, which compared survival of individual s 
(idiopathic PAH or associated with connective tissue, congenital heart disease, portal 
hypertension, or human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]) treated with treprostinil (up to 4 years) with predicted survival using a National Institutes of Health (NIH) registry equation or untreat ed 
individuals from registry data.  Treprostinil survival among 860 individuals was 87 –68% over 1 –4 
years, noting that 59% of individual s discontinued treatment due to adverse events (39%), death 
(27%), clinical deterioration (23%), and o ther reasons (withdrew consent, transplantation, 
protocol violation, and loss to follow -up; 11%). Sensitivity analyses found no differences 
between those discontinuing due to site pain reaction and individual s who did not discontinue; 
however, selection bi as due to censoring is possible and could bias the results in favor of 
treprostinil survival. Among 332 individual s for whom predicted survival could be calculated 
(using the NIH registry equation), treprostinil treatment resulted in 91% and 72% survival a t 1 
and 4 years compared to predicted survival of 69% and 38%, respectively.  
Findings of a 12 -week randomized placebo -controlled trial evaluating intravenous treprostinil in 
treatment -naïve individuals with PAH were published in 2 010 by Hiremath and collea gues.  The 
study, conducted in India, randomized 45 individual s, one of whom died during catheter Page | 18  of 53  ∞ placement. Due to safety concerns, recruitment was stopped early after these 45 individual s had 
enrolled; an intention -to-treat analysis was performed on these  individuals’ outcomes data. 
Forty -two of the 44 individual s who received study medication had idiopathic PAH, and 2 had 
PAH associated with collagen vascular disease. Forty -two of 44 individuals had NYHA Class III 
disease and 2 had Class IV disease. The i nitial dose of medication was 4 ng/kg/min treprostinil 
or an equivalent volume of placebo. After the first week, dose increases up to 8 ng/kg/min 
weekly were allowed, up to a maximum of 100 ng/kg/min. Thirty -one of 45 (67%) randomized 
individuals completed  the study; 6 individuals (3 in each group) died during the 12 -week follow-
up period. The mean treprostinil dose at 12 weeks was 72 ng/kg/min, and the mean placebo 
dose was 80 ng/kg/min. The primary efficacy outcome was change in the 6 -minute walk 
distance  (6MWD) from baseline to 12 weeks. The mean baseline 6MWD was 292 meters in the 
treprostinil group (n=30) and 231 in the placebo group (n=14). The mean change was an increase of 67.2 meters in the treprostinil group and a decrease of 25.5 meters in the placebo group; the difference between groups was statistically significant, p=0.022. This represents a 
placebo -corrected difference of a mean of 92.7 meters (standard error [SE]=42.0). The median 
placebo -corrected difference between groups was 83 meters (95% confidence interval [CI]:7 -187 
meters, p=0.008) There were also statistically significant differences on other outcomes, favoring 
the treprostinil group. For example, there was a mean decrease of 1.7 points on the Borg 
dyspnea scale in the treprostinil gro up and a mean increase of 0.4 points in the placebo group, 
p=0.009. (A higher score on the Borg scale represents more dyspnea.)  
 
Inhaled  
One small uncontrolled series reported treatment of PAH in children. Krishnan et al performed a 
retrospective cohort st udy of 29 children (median age 12 years, range 3.2 -19) who received 
inhaled Tyvaso® (treprostinil)  for 6 weeks or longer.  Children were individuals at one of 2 large 
pediatric PH centers (Columbia University Medical Center, New York and Children’s Hospital, 
Colorado). Indications for initiation of inhaled treprostinil therapy included symptomatic PAH 
despite background therapy or as a strategy to transition individuals off parenteral prostanoids. 
Twenty -six individual s were on PDE5 inhibitors, 22 were on endothelin -receptor antagonists, 12 
were on prostanoids, 18 were on dual therapy, and 5 were on triple therapy. Treprostinil was started at 3 breath s (6 mcg/breath) 4 times daily and titrated to a maximum of 9 breaths 4 times 
daily in 20 individuals. The maximum  dose for 9 younger children and individual s experiencing 
side effects was 4 -8 breaths 4 times daily. Mean treatment duration was 16 months. Four 
individuals discontinued treatment after 4 months due to progressive pulmonary symptoms, and 1 individual each required dose reduction due to nausea and hypotension. Common adverse 
effects were cough, sore throat, headache, and nausea. In 13 individuals for whom baseline and Page | 19  of 53  ∞ follow -up data were available, 6MWD improved from 456±72 meters to 498±70 meters. WHO 
functional class improved in 19 individuals and was unchanged in 10. Improvements in 
hemodynamic parameters (right atrial pressure, pulmonary artery p ressure, systemic arterial 
pressure, PVR, systemic vascular resistance) were observed in 8 individual s for whom baseline 
and follow -up data were available.  
 
Oral 
FDA approval of oral Orenitram® ( treprostinil ) for the treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) was 
based in part on 3 short -term RCTs: FREEDOM -C and FREEDOM -C2 in individuals receiving 
background PAH therapy, and FREEDOM -M in previously untreated individuals.  
FREEDOM -M (N=349 randomized; 228 analyzed) was a 12 -week, multicenter, double- blind, 
placebo -contro lled RCT of  oral treprostinil monotherapy.  Eligible individual s had PAH; were not 
currently receiving PDE5 -inhibitors, endothelin receptor antagonists, or prostacyclin; and had a 
minimum 6MWD of 100 meters. Individual s were randomized 2:1 to oral treprosti nil or matching 
placebo. Treprostinil was started at 1 mg twice daily and increased as tolerated every 3 days, but 
based on the FREEDOM -C trial (described next); starting dose was lowered to 0.25 mg twice 
daily. The primary end point was change from baseli ne 6MWD at 12 weeks; the trial was 
powered to detect a 45 -meter between -group difference in 6MWD at 12 weeks. Results were 
analyzed for only 65% of individuals in each group; individual s who had access to the 0.25 mg 
treprostinil dose at the time of random ization and received at least 1 dose of study drug were 
included (total N=228). For this group, mean age was 39 years, and 71% of individual s were 
from India or China. PAH etiologies were idiopathic or heritable (74%), collagen vascular disease 
(19%), cong enital heart defect (6%), and HIV (1%). Functional status was predominantly WHO 
class II (33%) and class III (66%). Mean baseline 6MWD was 330 meters. Twenty -six individual s 
(17%) receiving oral treprostinil and 11 individual s (14%) receiving placebo disco ntinued study 
drug; discontinuations due to adverse events occurred in 6 individual s and 2 individuals, 
respectively. Mean dose of treprostinil at week 12 was 3.4 mg twice daily. Missing data were 
imputed by last observation (or last rank) carried forward.  At week 12, there was a statistically 
significant greater improvement in 6MWD in the treprostinil group compared with placebo 
(treatment effect, 23 meters [95% CI, 4 to 41]; Hodges -Lehmann rank estimator, p=0.013), a 
finding that was maintained in subgrou p analyses. FDA reviewers noted that the robustness of 
the finding “depends heavily” on the method of analysis used; for example, giving all 
randomized individuals with missing data the lowest score yielded a statistically nonsignificant 
result (p=0.92). T here was no statistical between -group difference in time to clinical worsening 
(defined as in the FREEDOM -C and FREEDOM -C2 trials), a secondary outcome, in any analysis. 
The most common adverse events in 233 individuals randomized to treprostinil were head ache Page | 20  of 53  ∞ (69%), nausea (39%), diarrhea (37%), and jaw pain (25%). Sixteen randomized individuals died 
during the trial, 10 (4%) in the treprostinil group and 6 (5%) in the placebo group. Two deaths 
within the oral treprostinil group were considered possibly attributable to study drug. FDA 
reviewers did no t note this in their review.  
Expert opinion on the clinical utility of this drug differs. Although experts agree that oral 
administration of prostanoid will be a considerable advantage for individual s compared with 
continuous infused or inhaled administration, Feldman et al (2015) in Arizona raised concerns 
about inadequate dosing, interruptions to dosing, and switching to/from infused or inhaled prostanoids. In contrast, Skoro- Sajer et al (2014) in Austria d id not share these concerns.  
 
Ventavis® (iloprost)  
FDA approval of Ventavis® (iloprost)  was based in part on the results of a randomized, double- 
blind, multicenter placebo -controlled trial conducted in 203 adult individuals with PAH (WHO 
Group I); idiopathic  (53%), associated with connective tissue disease including CREST and 
scleroderma (17%), or associated with anorexigen use (2%) or pulmonary hypertension related 
to chronic thromboembol ic disease (WHO Group IV; 28%). The primary endpoint was a 
composite en dpoint at 12 weeks defined by 1) improvement in exercise capacity (6MWT) and 2) 
improvement by at least 1 NYHA class versus baseline; and no death or deterioration of 
pulmonary function. The response rate was 19% for the iloprost group compared to 4% for t he 
placebo group. There was inadequate evidence of benefit in individuals with PH associated with 
chronic thromboembolic disease (WHO Group IV). The use of iloprost requires a specialized dispensing device. One limitation of this delivery system is that the drug may be lost in the 
device tubing.  
 
Tracleer® (bosentan)  
The FDA approval of Tracleer® (bosentan)  was based in part on a randomized, placebo -
controlled double -blind study of 213 individual s with PAH (idiopathic (70%) or associated with 
connective tissue disease (30%); WHO Group I.  The primary endpoint was the degree  of change 
in exercise capacity. At 16 w eeks, a significant improvement was found in the 6MWT in the 
treatment group compared to the placebo group. Other measures of symptoms and functional 
status also improved in the treatment group, including a composite measure of “clinical 
worsening,” which consisted of the outcomes of death, hospitalizations for PAH, discontinuation 
of therapy, or need for epoprostenol.” In addition, the treatment group had a significant increase in cardiac index associated with reduction in the pulmonary artery pressure. A review Page | 21  of 53  ∞ article detailed 2 RCTs (n=310) that evaluated the effect of bosentan for the treatment of 
systemic sclerosis- associated digital ulcers. In both trials, there was significant improvement in 
hand function; however, no differences were seen in he aling  of established ulcers.  
 
Letairis® (ambrisentan)  
FDA approval of Letairis® (ambrisentan)  was based on two 12 -week randomized, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled multicenter st udies of 393 individual s with PAH.  ARIES -1 compared once -
daily doses of 5 mg and 10 mg of ambrisentan to placebo, while ARIES -2 compared once -daily 
doses of 2.5 and 5 mg. Individual s were not taking any of the other agents discussed in this 
policy during the study. Sixty -four percent had idiopathic PAH, and 32% had PAH associated 
with co nnective tissue disease. Placebo -adjusted mean changes from baseline in the 6MWD 
were 51 meters in AIRES -1 and 59 meters in AIRES -2 (results for the higher dosages). For the 
two trials, clinical worsening was noted in 10% and 22% of the placebo individual s compared to 
3% and 6% - all respectively, of those receiving ambrisentan. In 2010, Blalock published long -
term outcomes in 12 of 14 individuals who were enrolled in the AIRES -1 study at a single 
institution; these individuals enrolled in an extension of the 12 -week randomized period in 
which all participants received ambrisentan.  All of the 12 individual s remained on ambrisentan 
monotherapy duri ng the first 2 years of follow -up. Two individual s developed worsening 
symptoms requiring add -on intravenous (IV) therapy toward the end of the second year; 2 
others developed worsening symptoms after 2 years and began IV therapy. At last follow -up (3.5 
to 5 years), 11 individuals remained alive; 3 were on ambrisentan monotherapy, 5 on 
combinations of oral therapies and 2 on ambrisentan plus an IV prostacyclin.  
 Opsumit® (macitentan)  
The pivotal SERAPHIN trial (2013) assessed the efficacy and safe ty of Opsu mit® (macitentan)  to 
treat PAH.  SERAPHIN was an event -driven, double- blind RCT in 742 individual s with PAH (55% 
idiopathic, 31% associated with connective tissue disease, 8% associated with congenital shunt). 
Both treated (excluding endothelin receptor ant agonists) and untreated individual s were 
enrolled. Individual s were randomized to placebo or macitentan 3 mg or 10 mg once daily. The 
primary end point was a composite of morbidity (atrial septostomy, lung transplantation, or worsening of PAH) and all -cause mortality.  
Median treatment duration was 2 years 2 months. Primary end point events occurred in 46% of the placebo group, 38% in the 3 mg macitentan group (hazard ratio [HR] vs. placebo, 0.70; 97.5% CI: 0.52 to 0.96; p=0.01), and 31% in the macitentan 10  mg group (HR vs. placebo, 0.55; Page | 22  of 53  ∞ 97.5% CI, 0.39 to 0.76; p<0.001). Results were consistent across multiple sensitivity analyses and 
prespecified subgroups ( e.g., use or nonuse of concomitant PAH medication). The change from 
baseline in 6MWD at 6 months (a secondary outcome) was –9 meters in the placebo group, +7 
meters in the 3 mg macitentan group (least squares mean difference vs. placebo, 17 meters; 97.5% CI: - 3 to 36; p=0.01), and +13 meters in the 10 mg macitentan group (least squares mean 
difference vs . placebo, 22 meters; 97.5% CI: 3 to 41; p=0.008) from a baseline of 360 meters. 
Improvements in WHO functional class at month 6 in both macitentan groups were statistically significantly greater in both macitentan groups compared with placebo. Serious adv erse events 
and discontinuations due to adverse events occurred with similar frequency in all 3 groups. Adverse events that occurred more commonly in macitentan -treated individuals included 
headache (13% vs. 9%), anemia (11% vs. 3%), and bronchitis (10% vs . 6%). Liver enzyme 
elevations, which are associated with bosentan (the parent drug of macitentan), occurred in approximately 4% of individuals in all 3 groups.  
 
Revatio® (sildenafil citrate ) 
FDA approval of Revatio® (sildenafil citrate) , also marketed as Viagra , was based in part on the 
results of a study that randomized 278 individuals with PAH (idiopathic [60%], connective tissue 
disease [40%] WHO Group 1) to receive either placebo or sildenafil (20, 40, or 80 mg), oral ly, 3 
times daily for 12 weeks.  The study is known as the SUPER- 1 trial and the findings  were 
published by Galie and colleagues in 2005. There was a significant improvement in primary endpoint, defined as the change in baseline to week 12 in the distance walked in 6 minutes (6MWD). Of the 222 individual s completing 1 year of treatment, the improvement in distance 
walked in 6 minutes was 51 meters. There was no significant difference among the 3 different 
doses of sildenafil given, and thus the recommended dose is 20 mg 3 times per day. At doses 
higher than the recommended dose, there was greater incidence of some adverse events including flushing, diarrhea, myalgia, and visual disturbances.  
In 2011, Rubin et al. published findings from an open- label extension study for which all 
individuals who c ompleted the initial trial were eligible (SUPER -2). In the extension study, all 
individuals titrated up to 80 mg sildenafil 3 times daily unless they could not tolerate this dose; 
there was no placebo group. A total of 259 of the 277 (93.5%) individual s in the SUPER -1 trial 
entered the extension study. Compared to their SUPER -1 baseline value, at 3 years, 127 of 277 
(46%) of individual s had increased their 6MWD, 49 (18%) decreased their 6MWD, and 48 (17%) 
had missing data. A total of 81 individual s (29%) ha d at least a 60 -meter improvement in the 
6MWD compared to the SUPER -1 baseline, and another 22 (8%) had a 30 - to 60 -meter 
improvement. Three years from SUPER -1 baseline, 187 individuals were alive, 53 had died, and 
37 were lost to follow -up. The Kaplan -Meier estimate of the survival rate, based on all Page | 23  of 53  ∞ randomized individuals, was 79%. The estimate of survival was 68% if all censored individuals 
were considered to have died. During the extension study, most adverse effects were mild or 
moderate in severity an d were consistent with know n side effects of sildenafil, e.g. , headache, 
diarrhea, and dyspepsia. Serious adverse events were reported by 153 of 277 (55%) individual s. 
Serious events that were perceived to be treatment -related included grand mal seizure, 
hypotension, drug hypersensitivity, and gastroesophageal reflux disease (exact numbers of 
affected individual s were not reported). Thirty -nine individual s discontinued drug use due to 
adverse events. A major limitation of the extension study in terms of its  ability to evaluate 
efficacy was that there was no comparison group of individual s who were not taking sildenafil.  
 
Adcirca ® (tadalafil ) 
The pivotal trial on tadalafil (A dcirca ®), the Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension and Response to 
Tadalafil (PHIRST) study, was published by Galie et al. in 2009. This was a double -blind 
multicenter study conducted in the United States, Canada, Europe, and Japan. It included 406 
individuals who we re at least 12 years -old and had symptomatic PAH (Group 1) that was 
idiopathic/heritable or related to anorexigen use, connective tissue disease, HIV infection or congenital systemic -to-pulmonary shunts. Randomization was stratified by type of PAH 
(idiopat hic/heritable and anorexigen use versus other types), baseline bosentan use (53% were 
using bosentan), and baseline walking distance (less than 325 meters or at least 325 meters). 
Individual s were assigned to receive 16 weeks of treatment with placebo (n=8 2) or 1 of 4 doses 
of tadalafil: 2.5 mg (n=82), 10 mg (n=80), 20 mg (n=82), or 40 mg (n=79). A total of 331 (82%) 
individuals completed the 16 -week study. Discontinuation rates were similar across all treatment 
groups, about 16% in each. The efficacy analy sis was intention -to-treat and included 405 
individuals (all those randomized minus 1 individual who did not receive study medication). The 
primary efficacy outcome was placebo -corrected change from baseline to 16 weeks in the 
6MWD. Compared to placebo, on ly the individual s receiving 40 mg tadalafil significantly 
improved their 6MWD ( i.e., the p value was less than the prespecified cutoff of 0.01). For the 392 
participants who were assessed at 16 weeks, change in placebo -corrected 6MWD was as follows: 
14 meters (95% CI: 6 -33) for the 79 individual s in the 2.5 -mg group, 20 meters (95% CI: 1 -39) for 
the 78 individuals in the 10 -mg group, 27 meters (95% CI: 11- 44) for the 82 individuals in the 
20-mg group, and 33 meters (95% CI: 15- 50) in the 79 individuals in the 40 -mg group. The 
statistical significance cutoff for secondary outcomes was 0.05. There were no statistically significant differences between any of the tadalafil groups and placebo in the proportion of individuals with improved WHO functional class an d change in the Borg dyspnea scales. Time to 
clinical worsening, however, significantly improved in the tadalafil 40 -mg group compared to 
placebo (p=0.041). Moreover, the 40 -mg group had significantly greater improvement than Page | 24  of 53  ∞ placebo in 6 of the 8 quality -of-life domains in the Medical Outcomes Study 36 -item short form 
(SF-36); the total quality -of-life score was not reported. Three deaths occurred during the 16 -
week study period; the study was not designed to evaluate differences in the mortality rate.  
In 2012, Oudiz et al. reported results from the 52 -week, multicenter PHIRST  extension study, 
PHIRST -2. Of 364 eligible individual s (PHIRST completers [n=341] or those who discontinued 
due to clinical worsening [n=23]), 357 (98%) continued in PHIRST -2. Individ uals were 
randomized in a double -blinded fashion to tadalafil 20 mg or 40 mg orally once daily. Sixty -
three individual s received tadalafil 20 mg in both PHIRST and PHIRST -2, and 69 received tadalafil 
40 mg in both studies; all other individuals (n=225) wer e randomized to receive tadalafil 40 mg 
in PHIRST -2. In the former groups, improvements in 6MWD achieved in PHIRST were maintained 
in PHIRST -2: In the group that received tadalafil 20 mg in both studies, 6MWD was 406±67 
meters at the start and 415±80 meter s at week 52 in PHIRST -2 (n=52). In the group that 
received tadalafil 40 mg in both studies, 6MWD was 413±81 meters at the start and 410±78 
meters at week 52 in PHIRST- 2 (n=59). In contrast, individual s who had received lower tadalafil 
doses or placebo in PHIRST did not improve to similar levels after receiving 40 mg for 52 weeks. 
Headache was the most common adverse event, occurring in 14% and 16% of individuals 
receiving tadalafil 20 mg or 40 mg in both studies, respectively; these incidences were less th an 
those observed in PHIRST (32% and 42%, respectively), suggesting that headache may wane over time.  
 
Levitra® (vardenafil)  
Jing et al. published 2 studies from China evaluating Levitra® (vardenafil) ; a case series in 2009 
and an RCT in 2011. The case ser ies included 45 individuals with PAH who were admitted for 
treatment at one of th e participating study centers.  Eligibility was limited to individuals with 
idiopathic PAH, advanced pulmonary vasculopathy associated with connective tissue disease 
and congen ital heart disease or portopulmonary hypertension. Individual s were treated with oral 
vardenafil 5 mg daily for 1 month, after which time the dose was increased to 10 mg daily (5 mg twice a day) if tolerated. None of the individual s had received other PAH -active drugs in the 
previous 3 months, but individuals had been us ing vardenafil for a mean of 14  months before 
study entry. The mean baseline 6MWD was 409 meters (standard deviation [SD]: 103). All individuals were evaluated after 3 months of treatment at  which time the 6MWD had increased 
a mean of 71 meters (SD: 78). The change in distance from baseline was statistically significant (p<0.001). All individual s were also evaluated after a mean of 14 months (SD: 3) of treatment. At 
this longer -term follow -up, the mean increase in 6MWD was 83 meters (SD: 92), which was 
significantly higher than baseline (p<0.001) but not higher than the distance walked at 3 months (p=0.36). Change in functional improvement was seen at both 3 months and 14 months. At Page | 25  of 53  ∞ baseline, 11 (24%) individual s were in WHO functional class II, 29 (64%) were in class III, and 5 
(12%) were in class IV. At the end of the study, 5 (11%) were in functional class I, 31 (69%) in 
class II, 8 (18%) in class III, and 1 (2%) in class IV. No individuals died during the study; 2 
individuals were admitted to the hospital for PAH -related symptoms after 6 and 11 months, 
respectively. The study was limited in that there was no comparison group, the sample size was 
small, and most individual s had previously rec eived the study medication so they were more 
likely to continue to respond to it.  
A double -blind RCT, published by Jing et al in 2011, was conducted at 8 centers in mainland 
China.  The study randomized 66 individuals to receive 12 weeks of oral vardenafil monotherapy 
(n=44) compared to placebo (n=22). Individual s in the active treatment group received 5 mg 
vardenafil once daily for the first 4 weeks and then increased to the target dose of 5 mg twice daily, if tolerated. Two individuals dropped out before a ny follow -up data were recorded. Thirty -
nine of the remaining 64 individual s (61%) had idiopathic PAH, 19 (30%) had connective tissue 
disease, and 6 (9%) had repaired right -to-left shunting. WHO functional class at baseline was 
class II in 30 (47%) and class III in 34 (52%). Baseline 6MWD (the primary efficacy outcome) was a mean  of 388 meters in the placebo group and 395 in the vardenafil group. A total of 59 
individuals (89% of those randomized) completed the 12 -week randomized phase. After 12 
weeks, the median 6MWD increased by 59 meters in the vardenafil group and decreased by  10 
meters in the placebo group. The mean placebo -corrected treatment effect was 69 meters (95% 
CI: 41 to 98 meters, p<0.001). During the 12 -week follow- up period, 1 of 44 (2%) in the 
vardenafil group and 4 of 22 (18%) in the placebo group experienced clin ical worsening; the 
difference between groups was statistically significant, p=0.044. This includes 2 individual s in the 
placebo group who died. Other clinical outcomes favored the treatment group. Ten of 44 (23%) individuals treated with vardenafil improv ed at least one WHO functional class, compared to 
only 1 of 22 (5%) of individuals in the placebo group. In addition, the mean Borg dyspnea scale 
improved at week 12 (mean decrease of 0.4 point) in the vardenafil group, whereas the dyspnea score worsened ( increase of 1.8 points) in the placebo group; the authors did not report a 
between -group p value. Fifty -eight individual s completed a 12 -week open -label extension of the 
study in which all individuals received vardenafil 5 mg twice a day. At the end of the  extension 
phase, the mean improvement in the 6MWD in the group originally assigned to vardenafil was 69 meters. In addition, individuals who had been in the placebo group and then took vardenafil for 12 weeks had a mean increase of 59 meters in walk dista nce from week 12 (mean of 49 
meters improvement from baseline). This remains the only published RCT evaluating vardenafil for PAH; no major study was conducted in the United States; a limitation is that the analysis was not intention -to-treat.  
 Page | 26  of 53  ∞ Adempas® (r iociguat)  
The pivotal PATENT -1 trial (2013) assessed the efficacy and sa fety of Adempas® (riociguat)  to 
treat PAH.  PATENT -1 was a double -blind RCT in 443 adults who had symptomatic PAH (61% 
idiopathic, 25% associated with connective tissue disease, 8% associated with congenital heart 
disease). Both treated (excluding phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors) and untreated individual s 
were enrolled. Individual s were randomized to placebo or riociguat titrated to 0.5 to 2.5 mg 3 
times daily. (A second riociguat gr oup capped at 1.5 mg three times daily [63 individuals] was 
excluded from efficacy analyses.) Dose was optimized during the first 8 weeks, and the optimized dose was continued for 4 additional weeks. The primary efficacy outcome was a mean  
change in 6MWD at week 12.  
Approximately 90% of individual s in both groups completed the trial; 75% of completers in the 
riociguat group continued the maximum dose to week 12. Mean change in 6MWD was +30 
meters in the riociguat group and – 6 meters in the placebo group (leas t-squares mean 
difference, 36 meters; 95% CI: 20 to 52; p<0.001) from a baseline of 363 meters. Results were 
consistent across multiple sensitivity analyses and predefined subgroups ( e.g., use or nonuse of 
concomitant PAH medication). Improvements in PVR, N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide, WHO 
functional class, time to clinical worsening (defined as the first occurrence of death, transplantation, or other indicator of PAH worsening), and Borg dyspnea severity scale ( an 
individual- reported outcome) also were statistically significantly greater in the riociguat group. 
Adverse events occurred with similar frequency across groups. Adverse events that occurred 
more commonly in riociguat -treated individual s included stomach upset (19% vs. 8%), 
hypotension (10% v s. 2%), and anemia (8% vs. 2%). Eight riociguat -treated individual s (3%) and 
9 placebo -treated individuals (7%) discontinued study drug due to adverse events. Serious drug -
related adverse events that led to riociguat discontinuation included increased hepa tic enzyme 
levels, acute renal failure, and syncope.  
Eighty -five percent of individuals in the riociguat group enrolled in an extension study. The 
mean increase in 6MWD in this group was 36±54 meters at week 12 of PATENT -1. At week 12 of 
the extension study (week 24 of treatment), there was continued improvement reported with a 
mean increase of 53±62 meters on preliminary analysis. At 1 -year follow -up in 324 individual s 
(82%), mean increase in 6MWD from PATENT -1 baseline was 51±74 meters. WHO functional 
class improved in 33% of individual s, stabilized in 61%, and worsened in 6% compared with 
PATENT -1 baseline functional class.  
 Page | 27  of 53  ∞ Uptravi® (selexipag)  
A pivotal Phase 3, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled GRIPHON trial ( 2015) 
evaluated the efficacy and safety of Uptravi® (selexipag)  in 1156 individual s with pulmonary 
arterial hypertension. Individual s were eligible for enrollment if they were n ot receiving 
treatment for PAH or if they were receiving a stable dose of an endothelin -receptor antagonist, 
a phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, or both. The primary endpoint was a composite of death 
from any cause or a complication related to pulmonary arterial hypertension up to the end of 
the treatment period.  A primary endpoint event occurred in 397 individual s, with 27.0% in the 
selexipag group and 41.6% in the placebo group (hazard ratio  0.60; 99% CI 0.46 – 0.78; 
p<0.001). Disease progression and ho spitalization accounted for 81.9% of the events. The most 
frequent adverse events leading to discontinuation in the selexipag group (14.3%) were headache (3.3%), diarrhea (2.3%), and nausea (1.7%). No serious adverse events were reported more frequently in  the selexipag group than in the placebo group.  
 
Simvastatin  
In 2011, Kawut and colleagues published findings of a study evaluating simvastatin and aspirin, 
alone and together, for treating PAH.  The study used a 2X2 factorial design and was double -
blind an d placebo -controlled. After enrolling the first 65 individuals, the Data Safety and 
Monitoring Board did an interim analysis. The analysis showed that it was highly unlikely that simvastatin would show improvement in the primary outcome, change in the 6MWD at 6 
months, compared to aspirin or placebo and the study was terminated. No other RCTs were identified that studied any statin for treating PAH. This study represents insufficient evidence 
that simvastatin is an effective treatment for PAH.  
 
Atorvastatin  
In 2012, Zeng et al. published a 6 -month, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial of 
220 Chinese individuals with PAH (83%) or chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension 
(CTEPH; 6%) in WHO function al class II or III.  Individual s received  atorvastatin 10 mg orally daily 
or matching placebo in addition to supportive care (diuretics, digoxin, and warfarin). After 6 
months, the mean  difference in 6MWD (atorvastatin – placebo) was 2.5 meters (95% CI: - 33-
[+]38). There was no statistically signific ant difference between treatment groups in the 
proportion of individual s who improved or deteriorated in WHO functional class, or in 
hemodynamic parameters (right atrial pressure, pulmonary artery pressure, cardiac index, PVR, or mixed venous oxygen satura tion). There were 9 deaths in the atorvastatin group (8%) and 11 Page | 28  of 53  ∞ deaths in the placebo group (10%; p=0.31). The authors concluded, “Atorvastatin 10 mg daily 
has no beneficial effect on the natural history of PAH or CTEPH over 6 months.”  
 
Section Summary  
RCTs and several meta -analyses of RCTs have found that prostanoids, endothelin receptor 
antagonists, PDE5, and the soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator, riociguat, are all associated with 
small but statistically significant improvement in exercise capacity a nd hemodynamic parameters 
in individuals with PAH. Findings on mortality reduction are mixed; in general, the evidence base 
on the effect of approved treatments on mortality is limited by the small size and short duration of most trials. One terminated trial of simvastatin and 1 double -blind, placebo -controlled trial of 
atorvastatin indicated lack of efficacy of both drugs for treatment of PAH.  
 
PAH Combination Therapy  
RCTs have evaluated various combinations of medications for treating PAH. In addition, m eta-
analyses of RCTs have been published. The meta -analyses considered various combinations of 
medications; all of the individual trials included in the meta -analyses used medications from 
different classes. In addition, all trials used combination therapy  as second -line treatment, i.e., 
individuals were already taking one medication when they entered the trial.  
A meta -analysis published by Fox et  al. in 2011 included 6 trials.  The review’s inclusion criteria 
included studies in which individual s on one act ive treatment were randomized to receive a 
second medication or placebo. In addition, studies needed to have at least 12 weeks of follow -
up and to include clinical outcomes. A pooled analysis of data from 4 trials found a statistically significant increase  in the 6MWD with combination therapy versus monotherapy (weighted 
mean difference [WMD]: 25.2 meters, 95% CI: 13.3 to 38.2). The clinical significance of this degree of difference between groups in the 6MWD is unclear. Other pooled analysis did not find significant differences between groups. A meta -analysis of data from 4 trials did not find a lower 
risk of mortality with combination versus monotherapy (risk ratio [RR]: 0.42, 95% CI: 0.08 to 
2.26). In addition, a meta -analysis of 4 trials did not find a significant difference between groups 
in the rate of clinical worsening (composite variable including death, hospital admission, 
transplantation and treatment escalation) (RR: 0.42, 95% CI: 0.17 to 1.04).  
Another meta -analysis was published by Bai and colle agues in 2 011 and also included 6 trials.  
Inclusion criteria included RCTs on treatment of adults with PAH using combination therapy, follow -up of 8 weeks or more , and reporting of clinical outcomes. Five of 6 of the included Page | 29  of 53  ∞ articles were the same in both  meta -analyses. The meta -analyses differed on the 6th article they 
included; on e included Galie et al. (2009), and the ot her included Barst et al. 2011.  However, 
these 2 studies reported on data from the same randomized trial. A pooled analysis of data fro m 
5 trials found significantly greater improvement in the 6MWD with combination therapy 
compared to monotherapy (WMD: 22.2, 95% CI: 13.6 to 30.9). In addition, a pooled analysis of data from 5 trials found a significantly lower rate of clinical worsening w ith combination 
compared to monotherapy (RR: 0.48, 95% CI: 0.26 to 0.91). Clinical worsening referred to death, hospitalization, symptomatic deterioration, lack of improvement, interatrial fistulization, transplantation , or treatment escalation. A pooled analysis of data from 5 trials did not find a 
significant difference between groups in the risk of mortality (RR: 0.44; 95% CI: 0.04 to 4.65).  
The 2 meta -analyses both found that combination therapy resulted in significantly greater 
improvement in the 6MWD compared to monotherapy and both found no difference between groups in mortality. The Bai et al. meta -analysis, but not the Fox et al. meta -analysis, found a 
significantly lower rate of clinical worsening in the combination therapy group; clinical worsenin g was defined somewhat differently in the 2 meta -analyses.  
The 2013 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) c omparative effectiveness review  
previously described above included 5 RCTs of combination therapies. As in the Fox et al. and Bai et al.  meta -analyses, treatments from different classes were combined in the meta -analyses 
of the AHRQ review, and all treatment combinations were add -on therapies. Evidence was 
insufficient to form any conclusion about combination therapy in comparison to contin uation of 
monotherapy for the outcomes of mortality or hospitalization. Low strength of evidence supported an association between greater improvement in the 6MWD with combination therapy compared to continued monotherapy (mean difference in distance walked  23.9 meters [95% CI: 
8.0-39.9]). Because the magnitude of the treatment effect is less than the commonly accepted 
MID of 33 meters, the clinical significance of this finding is uncertain.  
A 2012 meta -analysis by Zhu et al.  incorporated results from 5 of t he 6 RCTs d iscussed below; 
the EARLY trial evaluating sildenafil add -on therapy to bosentan in mildly symptomatic 
individuals was excluded, and 1 small RCT (N=39) of sildenafil ad ded to bosentan therapy  was 
included. In 3 trials, inhaled prostanoid was add ed to bosentan or sildenafil, and in 3 trials, a 
PDE5 inhibitor was added to bosentan or epoprostenol. A total of 735 individual s were 
evaluated for the 6MWD outcome. The pooled treatment effect (weighted mean difference, combination - monotherapy) was 21. 6 meters (95% CI: 13.3 -29.9), less than the MID described 
above. For the outcome of clinical worsening (death, hospitalization, symptomatic deterioration, lack of improvement or the need for treatment escalation [such as additional drugs], the 
development of an interatrial fistula, or lung transplantation), 729 individuals were evaluated. 
The incidence of clinical worsening was lower in the combination therapy group than in the Page | 30  of 53  ∞ monotherapy group (risk ratio: 0.43 [95% CI: 0.26- 0.72]). Results were primarily  driven by 2 large 
trials which together comprised 68% of the individual sample.  
The key RCTs evaluating combination treatment for PAH are described below; studies are 
organized according to the classes of medications that were combined.  
 
Prostacyclin Analogues and E ndothelin Receptor Antagonists  
Three randomized trials evaluated the combination of inhaled iloprost and bosentan on clinical 
outcomes. In 2006, McLaughlin et al. conducted a randomized double -blind trial of adding 
iloprost or placebo to bosenta n monotherapy in 67 individuals with PAH (idiopathic, 55%, 
associated PAH, 45%). After 12 weeks, treatment with iloprost resulted in a placebo -adjusted 
6MWD improvement of 26 meters (p=0.05). Functional class, hemodynamic parameters ( e.g., 
pulmonary arteri al pressure, - 6 mm Hg vs. +3 mm Hg in the treatment and placebo groups, 
respectively), and time to clinical worsening (p=0.02) were all improved at 12 weeks in the 
treatment group compared with the placebo group. Hoeper et al. reported results from a small  
(n=40), 12 -week, nonblinded RCT evaluating the addition of iloprost to bosentan monotherapy 
in individuals with idiopathic PAH (IPAH, WHO Group 1). The study was terminated early 
because there appeared to be no benefit from the combined therapy: change wa s -10 meters on 
6MWD for the combination group and no difference in functional status, VO2 max (maximum 
oxygen consumption during exercise), and time to clinical worsening. The study noted that these 
results may have been skewed by 3 individuals in the ilo prost group who presented with severe 
clinical worsening.  In 2017, Han et al. published results for an open -label RCT evaluating the 
combination of bosentan and iloprost in 27 treatment -naïve individuals with PAH by comparing 
to bosentan and iloprost monot herapy. The primary endpoint, 6MWD , was evaluated at 6 weeks 
and 3 months after initiation of treatment compared with baseline values.  The 6MWD 
significantly improved  with combination therapy (95.6 meters and 133.75 meters) compared to 
both  bosentan (1.3 m eters and 0.86 meters) and iloprost (- 0.67 meters and 10.2 meters) 
monotherapy groups at week 6 (p=0.001)  and after 3 months  (p<0.001) . However, due to the 
small sample size and open -label study design, the study noted that additional studies with 
large samples and placebo controls were required to further assess the treatment efficacy and 
tolerability o f combination therapy for PAH.  
In 2010, McLaughlin et al. evaluated the addition of inhaled treprostinil  to oral therapy in a 
double -blind RCT with 235 individuals with PAH. Individual s had been on a stable dose of 
bosentan (n=165) or sildenafil (n=70) for at least 3 months. They were randomized to receive 
inhaled  treprostinil sodium (up to 54 mu g or placebo  4 times daily as add -on therapy. A total of 
212 (90%) individual s completed the study; analysis was intention to treat. The primary efficacy Page | 31  of 53  ∞ outcome was change in 6MWD over 12 weeks. Mean baseline 6MWD was 346 meters in the 
inhaled treprostinil group and 351 in the placebo group. After 12 weeks, the median change in 
peak 6MWD (10 -60 minutes after nebulizer use) was 21.6 meters in the treprostinil group and 
3.0 meters in the placebo group. The median between -group difference was 20 meters (95% CI: 
8.0 to 32.8; p=0.004). When the analysis was limited to the individual s taking bosentan at 
baseline, the median difference in change in 6MWD over 12 weeks was 25 meters (p=0.002). There were no differences between groups in the secondary end points rate of clinical  
worsening, Borg dyspnea scores, change in NYHA functional classifications or PAH signs and 
symptoms. For example, 4 of 115 (3%) individuals in the treatment group and 6 of 120 (5%) in the placebo group experienced clinical worsening during the 12 -week fol low-up period. Another 
secondary outcome was quality of life, measured by the Minnesota Living with Heart Failure (MLWHF) questionnaire; the potential range of the total score is 0 to 105, with a higher score indicating a worse quality of life. There was a  median difference between groups of - 4 points in 
the total score of the MLWHF; this difference was statistically significant, favoring the inhaled 
treprostinil group (p=0.027). Differences between groups in the 6MWD and quality -of-life 
measure may not be clinically significant. Following the 12 -week double- blind study, individuals 
had the option of enrolling in an open -label extension study in which all individuals received 
inhaled treprostinil. A total of 206 of 235 (88%) individual s participated in the extension study. 
Their mean (SD) 6MWD at baseline was 349 meters. The median change in 6MWD was 31 
meters (p<0.001, n=152) at 12 months and 18 meters (p=0.013, n=118) at 24 months. A limitation of this analysis was that there was no comparison with individu als who were not 
taking inhaled treprostinil.  
The 2004 Bosentan Randomized trial of Endothelin Antagonist Therapy for PAH (BREATH -2) trial 
compared epoprostenol alone with the combinatio n of epoprostenol plus bosentan . The trial 
was multicenter, double -blind, and placebo -controlled. It included 33 individual s with PAH who 
were scheduled to begin treatment with epoprostenol. After 2 days of epoprostenol therapy, 
individuals were randomized to add bosentan (n=22) or placebo (n=11). The double- blind 
treatment duration was 16 weeks,  and the primary efficacy outcome was change  in total 
pulmonary resistance. Five (15%) of 33 individuals did not complete the study. At 16 weeks, 
mean change in total pulmonary resistance did not differ significantly between groups ( -36.3 
dyns
-1cm5 ± 4.3% in the combination treatment group vs -22.6 ± 4.3% in the epoprostenol  plus 
placebo group, p=0.08). Secondary outcomes also did not differ significantly between groups. 
For example, the 6MWD increased a median of 68 meters in the comb ination treatment group 
and 74 meters in the epoprostenol plus placebo group. Moreover, the modified New York Heart 
Association functional class improved for  59% of individual s in the combination treatment group 
and 5 individuals in the epoprostenol plus placebo group (p=NS ). 
 Page | 32  of 53  ∞ Prostacyclin Analogs and Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors  
In the 2010 McLaughlin et al. study, previously discussed, individual s on monotherapy were 
randomized to receive added inhaled treprostinil or placebo; 70 individual s were taking 
sildenafil at baseline. In this subgroup, the median placebo -corrected change in 6MWD at 12 
weeks, the primary outcome, was 9 meters; the differen ce between groups was not statistically 
significant. As previously noted, the groups did not differ significantly on secondary efficacy 
outcomes other than quality of life.  
Simonneau et al. assessed the effect of adding oral sildenafil to long -term intrave nous 
epoprostenol (n=267) with PAH in a 2008 RCT. After 16 weeks, the adjusted mean change in the 
6MWD was 29.8 meters for the sildenafil group and 1.0 meter for the placebo group, a treatment difference of 28.8 meters (13.9 to 43.8 meters). In individual s with IPAH, the difference 
between groups was 33.9 meters in favor of the sildenafil group (p value and 95% CI not 
reported). Sildenafil also had a beneficial effect on hemodynamic measurements and health -
related quality of life.  
 
Prostacyclin Analogs Plus  Endothelin Receptor Antagonists and/or Phosphodiesterase 
Inhibitors  
The 2 pivotal trials of oral treprostinil in individuals on background PAH therapy, FREEDOM -C 
and FREEDOM -C2, were similar in design with the exception of the starting dose of oral 
treprostinil. In FREEDOM -C, starting dose was 1 mg twice daily, which may have reduced 
tolerability and contributed to a high dropout rate.  Based on this observation, starting dose in 
FREEDOM -C2 was decre ased to 0.25 mg twice daily.  
FREEDOM -C (N=350) and F REEDOM -C2 (N=310) were 16- week, multicenter, double- blind, 
placebo -controlled RCTs. Eligible individuals had symptomatic PAH; were receiving stable doses 
of approved PDE5 inhibitors and/or endothelin receptor antagonists and could walk a minimum 
of 100 met ers in 6 minutes at baseline (minimum 6MWD). Individual s were randomized 1:1 to 
receive add -on oral treprostinil, administered twice daily at the specified starting dose (1 mg in 
FREEDOM -C and 0.25 mg in FREEDOM -C2) and increased as tolerated every 3 days,  or matching 
placebo. The primary end point was change  from baseline 6MWD at 16 weeks; trials were 
powered to detect a 35 -meter between -group difference in 6MWD at 16 weeks. Secondary end 
points included time to clinical worsening ( e.g., death, transplanta tion, atrial septostomy, 
hospitalization related to PAH, or initiation of a new PAH therapy).  
Mean individual age was 51 years (range, 15 -76). PAH etiologies were idiopathic or heritable 
(66%), collagen vascular disease (29%), congenital heart defect (4%),  and HIV (1%). Functional Page | 33  of 53  ∞ status was predominantly WHO class II (23%) and class III (74%). Mean baseline 6MWD was 345 
meters in FREEDOM -C and 330 meters in FREEDOM -C2. In FREEDOM -C, 39 individual s (22%) 
receiving oral treprostinil and 24 individual s (14%) receiving placebo discontinued study drug; 
discontinuations due to adverse events occurred in 25 individuals and 8 individual s, respectively. 
No individual in the oral treprostinil group who was subsequently started at a lower dose 
discontinued treatment d ue to adverse events. Median treprostinil dose at week 16 was 3 mg 
twice daily. In FREEDOM -C2, 25 individuals (16%) receiving oral treprostinil and 15 individual s 
(10%) receiving placebo discontinued study drug; discontinuations due to adverse events occur red in 18 individuals and 5 individuals, respectively. Mean maximum dose of treprostinil at 
week 16 was 3.1 mg twice daily. In both trials, missing data were imputed by last observation (or 
last rank) carried forward. Neither trial met the primary efficacy  end point. Median between -
group differences in change from baseline 6MWD at week 16 (oral treprostinil – placebo) were 
11 meters and 10 meters in FREEDOM -C and FREEDOM -C2, respectively. No statistically 
significant between -group differences were observed in subgroup analyses or for any secondary 
outcome, including time to clinical worsening. In both trials, the most common prostacyclin -
related adverse events leading to treprostinil discontinuation were headache (7%), nausea (5%), 
vomiting (3%), and diarrhe a (3%). Ten individual s in FREEDOM -C2 died during the trial, 6 (4%) in 
the oral treprostinil group and 4 (3%) in the placebo group. Although 3 deaths within the oral 
treprostinil group were considered possibly attributable to study drug, FDA reviewers 
considered the death s due to underlying disease.  
FDA review documents  and the prescribing infor mation for oral treprostinil  describe an open -
label extension study for individuals who participated in any of the FREEDOM trials, remained on study drug, and comple ted all scheduled visits (N=824). Individual s from treprostinil groups 
continued dose escalation as tolerated from their final dose during the trial; individuals from 
placebo group initiated treprostinil at 0.25 mg twice daily. PAH etiologies were idiopath ic or 
heritable (70%), collagen vascular disease (24%), congenital heart defect (5%), and HIV (1%). 
Functional status was predominantly WHO class II (33%) and class III (64%). Mean oral treprostinil dose increased from 3.7 mg twice daily at 6 months to 5.3  mg twice daily at 3 years. 
Mean and maximal exposure to treprostinil was 2 years and 6 years, respectively. At 1 year, mean change from baseline 6MWD was 26 meters in all individual s (monotherapy and add -on 
therapy). Twenty -three percent of individual s discontinued treatment due to adverse events, 
most commonly PH, headache, and nausea. One -, 2-, and 3 -year overall survival estimates (92%, 
87%, 82%, respectively) are difficult to interpret in the absence of a control group.  
 Page | 34  of 53  ∞ Endothelin -Receptor Antagonists  and Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors  
An RCT by Galie et al. evaluated bosentan in mildly symptomatic individuals; the impact of 
combination therapy with bosentan and sildenafil was assessed in a subgroup of individual s as a 
secondary objective.  The analysis assessed the effect of bosentan versus placebo and the effect 
of bosentan combined with sildenafil versus placebo. There was no direct comparison between the bosentan and combination treatment groups. The sample size of this study was small. In 
addition, individual s with idiopathic PAH (IPAH) and those with PAH secondary to HIV, 
congenital heart disease, and connective tissue disease were included. It is not clear if the same results would be expected for only those with IPAH.  
In a 2015 prospective, double-b lind study by McLaughlin et al.,  334 symptomatic PAH 
individuals received stable sildenafil plus bosentan or placebo. The composite primary endpoint was the time to first morbidity/mortality event, defined as all- cause death, hospitalization for 
PAH worsen ing or intravenous prostanoid initiation, atrial septostomy, lung transplant, or PAH 
worsening. The primary endpoint event occurred in 51.4% of individuals randomized to placebo and 42.8% to bosentan (hazard ratio 0.83, 97.31% CI 0.58 – 1.19; p=0.2508). Th e secondary 
endpoint of change in 6MWD had a mean between -treatment difference at 16 weeks of +21.8 
meters (95% CI +5.9 – 37.8 m; p=0.106. Overall, the study showed that combination therapy of 
bosentan plus sildenafil was not superior to sildenafil monothe rapy in delaying the time to the 
first morbidity/mortality event, but the authors did note that the complexities of this composite endpoint and extent of missing information due to individual s discontinuing the study 
prematurely are potential contributing factors for this insignificant result. The Galie et al. study 
on tadalafil, discussed previously,  included a predefined subgroup analysis comparing treatment 
effectiveness in individual s who added tadalafil to baseline bosentan treatment and those taking 
only tadalafil. These findings were reported by  Barst and colleagues in 2011.  The analysis 
focused on the groups assigned to 40 mg tadalafil and placebo. At 16 weeks, there was statistically significant improvement in the 6MWD among individuals taking tadal afil 
monotherapy but not in the group taking combination therapy. The placebo -corrected 6MWD 
was 44 m (95% CI: 20 to 69) in the tadalafil -only group and 23 m (95% CI: -2 to 48) in individual s 
taking the combination of tadalafil and bosentan.  
Another double -blind RCT study in 2015 by Galie et al. evaluated 500 individual s with PAH who 
had not previously received treatment to receive initial combination therapy with ambrisentan plus tadalafil, ambrisentan plus placebo, or tadalafil plus placebo.  The primary e ndpoint was the 
time to the first event of clinical failure, defined as the first occurrence of a composite of death, hospitalization for worsening PAH, disease progression, or unsatisfactory long -term clinical 
response. The endpoint event occurred in 18%,  34%, and 28% of the subjects in these groups, 
with 31% in the pooled -monotherapy group (hazard ratio 0.50, 95% CI 0.35 – 0.72; p<0.001 for Page | 35  of 53  ∞ the combination therapy group compared with the pooled- monotherapy group. The study 
noted that the treatment effect was mainly driven by a lower rate of hospitalization for PAH in 
the combination therapy group. However, there was actually no significant difference in WHO 
functional class among study groups at Week 24, despite improvements in other factors.  
 
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors and Any of Three  Major Classes of Medications  
In 2010, Ghofrani and colleagues published findings of a multisite double -blind Phase II 
randomized trial evaluating imatinib as an add -on treatment in individuals with PAH; the study  
was conducted at sites i n the United States and Europe.  Fifty-nine individuals age 18 and older 
were enrolled; all had been on stable PAH medications for more than 3 months before 
enrollment but remained symptomatic. Individual s were taking a prostacyclin  analog, 
endothelin -receptor antagonist, PDE5, or combinations of these medications. Individuals in 
WHO functional class II -IV were eligible. Participants were randomized to receive 6 months of 
treatment with imatinib or placebo. Thirty -eight of 59 (64%) c ompleted the study; 2 individuals 
in each group died during the follow -up period. Analysis was intention to treat. In the treatment 
group, an initial dose of 200 mg oral imatinib was given for 2 weeks; if tolerated, the dose was increased to 400 mg. The pr imary efficacy outcome was change in the 6MWD. At 6 months, 
mean change in the 6MWD was an increase in 22 meters in the imatinib group and a decrease of 1 meter in the placebo group; this difference was not statistically significant, p=0.21. Findings 
were similar regardless of the method used to impute missing data.  
In 2013, Hoeper et al. published a 6 -month, international, randomized, placebo -controlled trial 
of add- on imatinib 400 mg orally once daily (reduced to 200 mg if not tolerated) in 202 
individuals with advanced PAH who were receiving at least 2 PAH therapies. Most individuals 
(approximately 40% in each group) were receiving triple therapy with an endothelin -receptor 
antagonist, a PDE5 inhibitor, and a prostanoid. The trial was completed by 67% of imatinib -
treated individual s and 82% of placebo -treated individual s; most discontinuations were due to 
adverse events in both groups (26% in the atorvastatin group, 7% in the placebo group). The mean between -group difference in 6MWD (imatinib -placebo) was 32 meters (95% CI: 12 -52), a 
finding that was robust to multiple modes of imputing missing data. Mortality, functional class, 
and time to clinical worsening (death, overnight hospitalization for worsening PAH, worsening of 
WHO functional class by at least 1 level, or a 15% or greater decrease from baseline 6MWD) did 
not differ between treatment groups. In a subset of 150 individual s (approximately 70 imatinib -
treated and 80 placebo -treated individuals), statistically significant improvements in 
hemodynamic parameters (PVR, cardiac output, mean pulmonary artery pressure, and right atrial 
pressure) were observed with imatinib compared to placebo. Of 150 individuals who completed 
the trial, 144 (66 imatinib -treated and 78 placebo -treated individual s) entered an  extension Page | 36  of 53  ∞ study of open -label imatinib. Among individual s who received 48 weeks of imatinib therapy, 
mean increase in 6MWD from baseline was 45±46 meters; among placebo -treated individuals 
who received imatinib in the extension study (24 weeks of imatinib  therapy), mean increase in 
6MWD from baseline was 19±72 meters (p=0.98). Serious adverse events occurred in 44% of the 
imatinib group and 30% of the placebo group; the most common serious adverse events in the imatinib group trial were anemia, dyspnea, pe ripheral edema, and presyncope. Subdural 
hematoma occurred in 8 individual s co-treated with imatinib and anticoagulation and in no 
individuals treated with placebo. Given the risk -benefit profile observed in the trial, the authors 
conclude that “the off -label use of imatinib for this indication is strongly discouraged.”  
 
Section Summary  
Meta -analyses of trials on combination therapy have included studies that use medications from 
different classes and evaluate the addition of a second medication in individu als already taking 
medication. 2 meta -analyses, which included data from the same 6 trials, have found small, 
statistically significant improvement in the 6MWD and have not found a significant benefit of 
combination therapy on mortality. Meta -analyses had mixed findings on the impact of 
combination therapy on clinical worsening, depending on how this variable was defined by the 
authors of the meta -analysis. There are few RCTs on any particular combination of therapies and 
findings of these studies are mixed . The evidence is sufficient to determine that combinations of 
classes of medications improve exercise capacity more than a single medication, although the impact on other outcome measures is not conclusive. Randomized trials of imatinib add -on 
therapy ind icated no additional improvement with imatinib in most outcomes measured, and 
potential harm (subdural hematoma).  
 
CTEPH Monotherapy  
Riociguat  
The pivotal CHEST -1 trial (2013) assessed the efficacy and safety of riociguat to treat CTEPH.  
CHEST -1 was a doub le-blind RCT in 261 adults who had inoperable CTEPH (72%) or persistent 
PH after pulmonary endarterectomy (28%). Individual s receiving PAH medications were 
excluded. Individual s were randomized to placebo or riociguat titrated to 0.5 to 2.5 mg 3 times 
daily. Dose was optimized during the first 8 weeks, and the optimized dose was continued for 8 
additional weeks. The primary efficacy outcome was change in 6MWD at 16 weeks.  Page | 37  of 53  ∞ Approximately 93% of individual s in each group completed the trial; 77% of completers in the 
riociguat group continued the maximum dose to week 16. Mean change in 6MWD was +39 
meters in the riociguat group, and – 6 meters in the placebo group (least -squares mean 
difference, 46 meters; 95 % CI: 25 to 67; p<0.001) from a baseline of 347 meters. Results were 
consistent across multiple sensitivity analy ses and predefined subgroups ( e.g., baseline WHO 
functional class). Improvements in PVR, N -terminal brain natriuretic peptide, and WHO 
function al class also were statistically significantly greater in the riociguat group. Adverse events 
occurred in 92% of the riociguat group and 86% of the placebo group. Adverse events that 
occurred more commonly in the riociguat group included headache (25% vs. 14%), dizziness (23% vs. 12%), stomach upset (18% vs. 8%), vomiting (10% vs. 3%), diarrhea (10% vs. 5%), and 
hypotension (9% vs. 3%). The most common serious adverse events were right ventricular failure 
(3% in each group), syncope (2% riociguat vs 3% plac ebo), and hemoptysis (2% riociguat). One 
individual died due to acute renal failure attributed to riociguat.  
Seventy -five percent of individuals in the riociguat group enrolled in an extension study; mean 
increase in 6MWDin this group was 51±62 meters at w eek 16 of CHEST -1 and 63±64 meters in 
preliminary analysis at week 12 of the extension study (week 28 of treatment).  
Additional data on secondary outcomes from CHEST -1 were published by Kim et al  in 2017 
Study findings generally  favored the riociguat grou p. At week 16, compared with baseline, PVR 
significantly decreased in the riociguat group ( -29%) compared with the placebo group (+3%). 
There were also significantly improved outcomes in the riociguat group vs placebo for other 
hemodynamic outcomes ( e.g., systemic vascular resistance, mean pulmonary artery pressure, 
diastolic pulmonary artery pressure, cardiac output, mixed venous oxygen saturation, mean 
arterial pressure, diastolic pressure gradient; p<0.001 for each).  
 
CTEPH Perioperative Therapy  
For individuals with CTEPH who are eligible for pulmonary endarterectomy, preoperative 
elevation of PVR (>1100 Wood units) can increase operative mortality rates to 6% to 10%. Several studies have investigated the use of PAH -specific treatments to reduce elevated  PVR 
preoperatively in individual s with CTEPH who are candidates for pulmonary endarterectomy.  
 
Bosentan  
In 2010, Reesink et al. reported results of a single- blind RCT in 26 individuals with CTEPH who 
were eligible for pulmo nary endarterectomy.  Mean baseli ne total pulmonary resistance was Page | 38  of 53  ∞ approximately 1000 Wood units. Fourteen individuals received bosentan for 16 weeks before 
surgery; 1 individual developed liver enzyme elevations to 6 times the upper limit of normal and 
was excluded from efficacy analyses . Eleven individuals in the bosentan group and 10 individuals 
in the no -bosentan group underwent pulmonary endarterectomy. Mortality rates within 30 days 
after surgery were 9% and 30%, respectively.  
 
Epoprostenol  
Nagaya et al. (2003) retrospectively examined the effect of preoperative intravenous pros tacyclin 
analog (epoprostenol).  Of 33 consecutive individuals with CTEPH who underwent pulmonary 
endarterectomy, 12 individual s with preoperative PVR greater than 1200 Wood units received 
preoperative epoproste nol for a mean of 6±2 weeks. Statistically significant reductions in PVR 
before surgery and further reductions after surgery led to a statistically nonsignificant difference 
between groups 1 month after surgery (mean PVR approximately 300 Wood units in bot h 
groups). The only individual  who died within 30 days after surgery was in the epoprostenol 
group for an overall mortality rate of 3.0% (8.3% mortality rate in the epoprostenol group; 0% in 
the comparator group).  
In a similar study, Bresser et al. (2004) retrospectively reviewed 9 individual s who had received IV 
epoprostenol for a median of 4 months (range, 2 -26) befo re pulmonary endarterectomy.  
Median baseline total pulmonary resistance was 1432 Wood units, and median baseline PVR was 
1031 Wood units. (Ba seline PVR could not be calculated in 1 individual.) Preoperatively, median 
total PVR decreased to 1000 Wood units, and median PVR decreased to 760 Wood units. Median total pulmonary resistance on postoperative day 1 or 2 was 350 Wood units.  
 
Iloprost  
In 2003, Kramm et al. reported on the effect of inhaled iloprost in the perioperative period.  Ten 
individuals with mean PVR of 972 Woods units received inhaled iloprost at 3 time points: 
immediately before surgery, upon admission to the intensive care unit after surgery, and at 12 or 
more hours after surgery. Preoperative inhalation did not affect PVR. After surgery, PVR 
decreased 10% and 22% after each postoperative dose compared with placebo (saline) inhalation at the same time points; however, all postoperat ive measurements (pre- and 
posttreatment) were less than 360 Wood units. One individual died 17 days after surgery due to 
persistent pulmonary hypertension (10% mortality rate).  
 Page | 39  of 53  ∞ Riociguat  
There are no trials evaluating riociguat for preoperative therapy.  Because of the different 
mechanism of action for the different drugs, results from the studies previously described 
cannot be extrapolated to riociguat.  
 
Summary of Evidence  
There is evidence from multiple randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and meta -analyses of RCTs 
that monotherapy using prostanoids, endothelin- receptor antagonists, phosphodiesterase type 
5 (PDE5) inhibitors, or the soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator, riociguat, improves health 
outcomes in individuals with World Health Organization (WH O) Group 1 PAH. Thus, U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA)‒approved medications in these classes may be considered 
medically necessary for the treatment of individuals with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Evidence on the comparative efficacy of t hese individual agents is lacking; therefore it is not 
possible to determine which one is preferable as the first -line choice for treatment. There is 
insufficient evidence that simvastatin, atorvastatin, or imatinib are effective for treating individuals with PAH, and these medications do not have FDA -approved PAH indications. Thus, 
simvastatin, atorvastatin, and imatinib are considered investigational.  
There is evidence from trials on combination therapy and meta- analyses of these trials that 
combination thera py as second -line treatment using medications from different classes results 
in improvement in exercise capacity; evidence on mortality and clinical worsening is 
inconclusive. Additionally, evidence is lacking on which particular combination of medications  is 
optimal. Clinical input in 2011 uniformly thought that at least some therapy combinations were 
beneficial. Therefore, combination therapy as second- line treatment may be considered 
medically necessary when certain conditions are met. Additional trials on combination treatment 
are underway, including at least 1 evaluating combination therapy as first -line treatment. 
Riociguat is contraindicated with PDE5 inhibitors.  
There is evidence from 1 RCT that riociguat improves health outcomes in individual s with 
chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH; WHO Group 4 PH) who are ineligible 
for pulmonary endarterectomy or have persistent pulmonary hypertension (PH) after pulmonary endarterectomy. Riociguat is therefore considered medically necessary in th ese individual  
groups. Riociguat has not been studied to reduce elevated preoperative pulmonary vascular 
resistance in individual s eligible for pulmonary endarterectomy. There is insufficient evidence for 
the use of any PAH -specific medication in this sett ing; clinical input did not support the medical  
necessity of riociguat or PAH -specific medications for this use. Due to lack of evidence and lack Page | 40  of 53  ∞ of support from clinical vetting, PAH -specific medications and riociguat are considered 
investigational for this i ndication.  
 
Practice Guidelines and Position Statements  
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension  
In 2019, the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) updated their guidelines on 
pharmacologic therapy for PAH in adults. Relevant new recommendations include:  
• For individual s with PAH who are treatment naive with World Health Organization (WHO) 
functional class (FC) II or class III symptoms, “an initial combination therapy with ambrisentan and tadalafil to improve 6MWD [6 -minute walk dis tance]” is suggested (a weak 
recommendation with moderate quality evidence).  
• “For stable or symptomatic PAH individuals on background therapy with ambrisentan,” a 
weak recommendation with low -quality evidence is made for the addition of tadalafil to 
improv e 6MWD.  
• To delay time to clinical worsening in treatment naive PAH individual s with WHO FC II 
symptoms, the guidelines recommend bosentan, macitentan, or riociguat (all ungraded consensus- based statements).  
• To improve 6MWD for treatment -naive individuals w ith WHO FC III symptoms, the 
guidelines recommend bosentan(strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence), ambrisentan (strong recommendation, low quality evidence),sildenafil (strong recommendation, low -quality evidence), tadalafil (ungraded consensus -based statement), or 
riociguat (ungraded consensus -based statement).  
• To delay time to clinical worsening in PAH individual s who are treatment naive with WHO FC 
III symptoms, the guidelines recommend macitentan, tadalafil, or riociguat (all ungraded 
consensus -based statements).  
• For individual s with PAH who are treatment -naive, have WHO functional class II or class III 
symptoms, and “who are not candidates for, or who have failed, CCB [calcium channel blocker] therapy, ” monotherapy with an “approved endothel in receptor antagonist (E RA), 
phosphodiesterase -5 (PDE -5) inhibitor (PDE5I), or … riociguat" is advised for individuals who 
are "unwilling or unable to tolerate combination therapy" with ambrisentan and tadalafil.  Page | 41  of 53  ∞ • For individual s with PAH in WHO functional class III “who have evidence of rapid progression 
of their disease...“  initial treatment with a parenteral prostanoid  ”should be considered". For 
individuals with a "poor clinical prognosis despite  treatment with one or two classes of oral 
agent s,” consideration of the “addition of a parenteral or inhaled  prostanoid” is 
recommended.  
• For individual s with PAH who are treatment -naive and have WHO functional class IV 
symptoms, initial therapy with a  parenteral prostanoid agent” is recommended. If ind ividuals 
“are unable or do not desire to manage parenteral  prostanoid therapy,  ”combination 
treatment with “an inhaled prostanoid” and “an oral PDE5I and an E RA” is  recommended.  
In 2013, the ACCP and American Heart Association released a joint policy statement, The 
Choosing Wisely Top Five List  in Adult Pulmonary Medicine.  The list includes a recommendation 
to not routinely offer advanced vasoactive agents  approved only for the management of PAH to 
individuals with disease resulting from left heart disease  or hypoxemic lung  disease (group II or 
III PH).  
 
Chronic Thromboembolic PH  
The 2009 ACCF/AHA Expert Consensus Document on Pulmonary Hypertension recommended 
pulmonary endarterectomy fo r eligible individuals with CTEPH.  The panel noted that 
pharmacotherapy  with PAH -specific medications may benefit CTEPH individual s who are 
ineligible for pulmonary endarterectomy due to significant distal disease or comorbidity; 
individuals who have persistent pulmonary hypertension due to residual distal disease after 
pulmo nary endarterectomy; and individual s eligible for pulmonary endarterectomy who are 
considered high -risk due to poor functional status or hemodynamics and may benefit from 
presurgical treatment with intravenous epoprostenol. The panel recommended that PAH -
specific medications be used for CTEPH individuals only when “appropriate secondary 
preventive measures, including anticoagulation, have been instituted” and “the individual’s 
symptoms suggest that PAH -specific therapy may yield clinical benefit.”  
An Americ an Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement (2011) makes the following 
recommendations for medical therapy and pulmonary endarterectomy in individual s with 
CTEPH:  
• Individual s with CTEPH should be promptly evaluated for pulmonary endarterectomy, even 
with mild symptoms.  Page | 42  of 53  ∞ • Individual s with CTEPH “should receive indefinite therapeutic anticoagulation in the absence 
of contraindications.”  
• “PAH (WHO Group I) -specific medical therapy may be considered for individual s with CTEPH 
who are not surgical candidates…or who have residual pulmonary hypertension after 
operation not amenable to repeat pulmonary endarterectomy…."  
• “PAH (WHO Group I) -specific medical therapy should not be used in lieu of pulmonary 
endarterectomy or delay evaluation for pulmonary endarterectom y for individuals 
with…CTEPH who are or may be surgical candidates.”  
 
Medicare National Coverage  
There is no national coverage determination.  
 
Regulatory Status  
Table 1  summarizes the advanced therapies for treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) and their 
regulatory status:  
 
Table 1: Advanced Treatments of PAH and Their Regulatory Status  
Drug  
Brand Name  
Manufacturer  
FDA Approval Date  Route(s) of Administration  
Dose range  FDA Approved Indications  
Prostacyclin Analogues  
epoprostenol sodium 
(FLOLAN®) 
 
GlaxoSmithKline  
 
FDA approved 1995  Continuous intravenous  
IV infusion via central venous catheter using an ambulatory infusion pump  
1 to 20 ng/kg/min  Treatment of pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH) (WHO Group I) to 
improve exercise capacity. Studies establishing effectiveness included predominantly individuals with NYHA 
Functional Class III -IV symptoms and 
etiologies of idiopathic or heritable 
PAH or PAH associated with connective tissue diseases.  Page | 43  of 53  ∞ Drug  
Brand Name  
Manufacturer  
FDA Approval Date  Route(s) of Administration  
Dose range  FDA Approved Indications  
epoprostenol sodium 
(Veletri®) 
 
Actelion Pharmaceuticals 
US, Inc. 
 FDA approved 1995  Continuous intravenous  
IV infusion via central venous catheter using an ambulatory infusion pump  
1 to 20 ng/kg/min  Treatment of pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH) (WHO Group I) to improve exercise capacity. Studies establishing effectiveness included 
predominantly individuals with NYHA 
Functional Class III -IV symptoms and 
etiologies of idiopathic or heritable 
PAH or PAH associated with connective tissue diseases.  
treprostinil sodium  
(REMODULIN®) 
 United Therapeutics Corp.  
 
FDA approved 2002  Continuous subcutaneous (SC) infusion  
IV infusion (if SC infusion not tolerated)  
0.625 to 1.25 ng/kg/min  Treatment of pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH) (WHO Group 1) to diminish symptoms associated with 
exercise. Studies establishing 
effectiveness included individuals with NYHA Functional Class II -IV symptoms . 
Individual s who require transition from 
Flolan, to reduce the rate of clinical 
deterioration.  
(TYVASO®)  
 
United Therapeutics Corp.  
 FDA approved 2009  Inhalation via nebulizer; specific to one 
pulmonary drug delivery system  
18-54 mcg, 4 times/day  
 Treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) to 
improve e xercise ability. Studies 
establishing effectiveness included 
predominately individuals with NYHA 
Functional Class III symptoms . 
Pulmonary hypertension associated 
with interstitial lung disease  (PH-ILD; 
WHO Group 3) to improve exercise ability.  
(TYVASO  DPI™) 
 United Therapeutics Corp.  
 
FDA approved 20 22 Inhalation via dry powder inhaler  
16-64 mcg, 4 times/day  Treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) to 
improve exercise ability. Studies 
establishing effectiveness included predominately individuals with NYHA  
Functional Class III symptoms . 
Pulmonary hypertension associated with interstitial lung disease (PH -ILD; 
WHO Group 3) to improve exercise ability.  
(ORENITRAM®)  Oral Treatment of PAH) (WHO Group 1) to 
improve exercise capacity. The study Page | 44  of 53  ∞ Drug  
Brand Name  
Manufacturer  
FDA Approval Date  Route(s) of Administration  
Dose range  FDA Approved Indications  
United Therapeutics Corp.  
FDA approved 2013  Maximum dose as tole rated: 3.4 -21 mg 
twice da ily3 that established effectiveness included 
predominately individuals with WHO 
functional class II -III symptoms and 
etiologies of idiopathic or heritable 
PAH (75%) or PAH associated w ith 
connective tissue disease (19%).  
iloprost  
(VENTAVIS®) 
 
Actelion, Ltd.  
 FDA approved 2004  Inhalation via nebulizer; specific to one 
pulmonary drug delivery system  
2.5 to 5 mcg, 6-9 times/day  Treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) to 
improve a composite endpoin t 
consisting of exercise tolerance, symptoms (NYHA Class), and lack of deterioration. Studies establishing effectiveness predominately included 
individuals with NYHA Functional Class 
III-IV symptoms . 
Prostacyclin receptor agonists  
Selexipag  
(UPTRAVI®) 
 Actelion, Ltd.  
 FDA approved 2015  Oral 
IV infusion (i f temporarily unable to 
take oral therapy ) 
 Starting dose 200 mcg twice daily. Increase by 200 mcg twice weekly to 
maximum tolerated dose up to 1600 
mcg twice daily  Treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) to 
improve delay disease progression and reduce risk of hospitalization for PAH. Study establishing effectiveness had 
long-term follow -up and included 
individuals with WHO functional class 
II-III symptoms.  
Endothelin Recepto r Antagonists  
Bosentan  
(TRACLEER®) 
 
Actelion, Ltd.  
 
FDA approved 2001  Oral 
62.5 to 125 mg 2 times/day  Treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) to 
improve exercise ability and to decrease clinical worsening. Studies 
establishing effectiveness 
predominantly included individual s 
with NYHA Functional Class II -IV 
symptoms . 
Ambrisentan  
(LETAIRIS®) 
 Gilead Sciences, Inc.  
 FDA approved 2007  Oral 
5-10 mg/day  Treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) to 
improve exercise ability and delay clinical worsening. Studies establishing effectiveness predominantly included 
individuals with NYHA Functional Class 
II-III symptoms  Page | 45  of 53  ∞ Drug  
Brand Name  
Manufacturer  
FDA Approval Date  Route(s) of Administration  
Dose range  FDA Approved Indications  
Macitentan  
(OPSUMIT®) 
 
Actelion Pharmaceuticals  
 FDA approved 2013  Oral  
10 mg/day  Treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) to 
delay disease progression (defined as death, initiation of IV or SC prostenoids, or clinical worsening of 
PAH [decreased 6 -minute walk 
distance, worsened PAH symptoms, 
and need for additional PAH treatment]). Macitentan also reduced 
hospitalization for PAH.  
Phosphodiesterase (PDE5) Inhibitors  
Sildenafil citrate  
(REVATIO®) 
 
Pfizer Labs  
 
FDA approved 2005  Oral 
20 mg 3 times/day  Treatment of PAH to improve exercise 
ability.  
August 2012: FDA recommended that Revatio not be prescribed to children 
(ages 1 -17) for PAH. (The product has 
not been approved for the treatment of PAH in children).  
tadalafil  
(ADCIRCA®, TADLIQ®) 
 Eli Lilly  
 FDA approved 2009  Oral 
40 mg once/day  Treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) to 
improve exercise ability and delay clinical worsening. Studies establishing effectiveness predominately included 
individuals with NYHA Functional Class 
II-III symptoms.  
 
Soluble Guanylate Cyclase Stimulators  
Riociguat  
(ADEMPAS®) 
 Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals  
 
FDA approved 2013  Oral 
0.5-2.5 mg 3 times/day  Treatment of PAH (WHO Group 1) to 
improve exercise capacity and WHO functional class, and to delay clinical 
worsening. The pivotal study establishing efficacy and safety for this 
condition predominantly included 
individuals with NYHA Functional Class 
II-III symptoms.  
Treatment of persistent/recurrent CTEPH (WHO Group 4) after surgical treatment or inoperable CTEPH to improve exercise capacity a nd WHO 
functional class.  Page | 46  of 53  ∞ CTEPH: chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension; FDA: U.S. Food and Drug Administration; PAH: pulmonary 
arterial hypertension; SC: subcutaneous; NYHA: New York Heart Association; WHO: World Health Organization.  
aMean  dose in a controlled clinical trial at 12 w eeks was 3.4 mg twice daily. Maximum doses studied were 12 mg twice 
daily in a 12 -week blinded study and 21 mg twice daily in an open -label long -term study  
 
2011 
In response to requests, input was received throug h 4 academic medical centers while this policy 
was under review in 2011. The input focused on the issue of combination therapy. Two of the 
academic medical centers disagreed with the 2010 policy statement that combination therapy is considered investigatio nal (other than when changing from 1 medication to another). The other 
2 academic medical centers had mixed input; both thought there were situations in which 
combination therapy is medically necessary.  
 
2014 
In response to requests, input was received through 4 academic medical centers (5 reviewers) 
and 1 professional pharmacy society while this policy was under review in 2014. The input 
focused on:  
• The use of riociguat and PAH -specific medications to reduce PVR preoperatively in 
individuals with CTEPH who  are candidates for pulmonary endarterectomy: There was 
consensus among reviewers that riociguat is investigational in this setting, and there also 
was consensus that PAH specific medications are investigational in this setting.  
• The use of riociguat in individuals with CTEPH who are candidates for pulmonary 
endarterectomy but prefer medical treatment: Results of vetting were mixed on this question.  
 
2016 
A literature search was conducted between November 1, 2015, and November 30, 2016. 
Research did not yield additional evidence to prompt a change to the existing policy criteria. 
References section was updated with four additional articles.  
 Page | 47  of 53  ∞ 2017 
A literature search was conducted between November 30, 2016, and October 31, 2017. 
References section was updated with six additional articles. Oral Uptravi® (selexipag) was added 
to the medically necessary policy statement.  
 
2018 
A literature search was conducted between November 1, 2017, and October 9, 2018. Research did not yield additional evidence to prompt a change to the existing policy criteria. References 
section was updated with additional articles. Clarified sildenafil vs. sildenafil citrate.  
 
2019 
Reviewed prescribing information for all drugs and  conducted a literature search from July 1, 
2018, through August  15, 2019 . Identified Veletri® (epoprostenol) as missing and added 
Veletri ® to policy with the same criteria as Flolan ® (epoprostenol). No new evidence was 
identified that would require change s to other drugs listed in this policy.  
 
2020  
Reviewed prescribing information for all drugs and  conducted a literature search from August 1, 
2019, through February  28, 2020. No new evidence was identified that would require changes to 
coverage criteria li sted in this policy.  
 
2021 
Reviewed prescribing information for all drugs and conducted a literature search from February 29, 2020, through January 1, 2021.  No new evidence or guideline updates were identified that would require changes to coverage criter ia listed in this policy.  
 Page | 48  of 53  ∞ 2022 
Added coverage for combination therapy with tadalafil and ambrisentan as first -line treatment 
for individual s who have WHO Functional Class Groups II and III disease.  Initial combination 
therapy with tadalafil  and ambrisent an resulted in a significantly lower risk of clinical- failure 
events than the risk with ambrisentan or tadalafil monotherapy.  Reviewed product availability 
and added Tyvaso DPI ™ (treprostinil) oral inhalation powder dosage form to the medical policy.  
Tyvas o DPI ™ is a dry powder inhalation and is more portable and can be administered more 
quickly compared to the Tyvaso ® solution which requires a nebulization device. Both Tyvaso ® 
and Tyvaso DPI ™ are administered four times daily.  Updated Description and Background 
information for PAH. Updated Practice Guidelines and Position Statements  for PAH and CTEPH.  
 
2023  
No new evidence was identified that would require changes to coverage criteria listed i n this 
policy.  Added Liqrev ®(sildenafil) to phosphodiesterase -5 (PDE -5) inhibitors for the indication  of 
PAH WHO group 1 to match with the FDA label.  
 
References   
 
1. Simonneau G, Gatzoulis MA, Adatia  I, et al. Updated clinical classification of pulmonary hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. Dec 24 
2013; 62(25 Suppl): D34- 41. PMID 24355639  
2. McLaughlin VV, Archer SL, Badesch DB, et al. ACCF/AHA 2009 expert consensus document on pulmonary hypertension: a repo rt 
of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force on Expert Consensus Documents and the American Heart 
Association: developed in collaboration with the American College of Chest Physicians, American Thoracic Society, Inc., and t he 
Pulmonary Hy pertension Association. Circulation. Apr 282009; 119(16): 2250- 94. PMID 19332472 
3. Galie N, Hoeper MM, Humbert M, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension: the Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Pulmonary Hyperte nsion of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European 
Respiratory Society (ERS), endorsed by the International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT). Eur Heart J. Oct 2009; 30(20): 2493- 537. PMID 19713419  
4. Galie N, Humbert M, Vachie ry JL, et al. 2015 ESC/ERS Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension: 
The Joint Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Pulmonary Hypertension of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Respiratory Society  (ERS): Endorsed by: Association for European  
5. Paediatric and Congenital Cardiology (AEPC), International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT). Eur Respir J. Oct 2015; 46(4): 903- 75. PMID 26318161 
6. Archer SL. Riociguat for pulmonary hypertensio n--a glass half full. N Engl J Med. Jul 25 2013; 369(4): 386- 8. PMID23883383 Page | 49  of 53  ∞ 7. Benza RL, Miller DP, Barst RJ, et al. An evaluation of long -term survival from time of diagnosis in pulmonary arterial 
hypertension from the REVEAL Registry. Chest. Aug 2012; 142(2): 448- 456. PMID 22281797 
8. Frost AE, Barst RJ, Hoeper MM, et al. Long -term safety and efficacy of imatinib in pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. Nov 2015; 34(11): 1366- 75. PMID 26210752 
9. Anand V, Garg S, Duval S, et al. A systematic r eview and meta -analysis of trials using statins in pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Pulm Circ. Sep 2016; 6(3): 295- 301. PMID 27683606 
10. Zeng WJ, Xiong CM, Zhao L, et al. Atorvastatin in pulmonary arterial hypertension (APATH) study. Eur Respir J. Jul2012; 40 (1): 
67-74. PMID 22362846 
11. Lajoie AC, Lauziere G, Lega JC, et al. Combination therapy versus monotherapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension: a meta -
analysis. Lancet Respir Med. Apr 2016; 4(4): 291- 305. PMID 26935844 
12. McCrory DC, Coeytaux RR, Schmit KM, et a l. Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension: Screening, Management, and  Treatment. 
Rockville MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2013.https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/products/hypertension -
pulmonary -arterial/research. Accessed May 4, 2023.  
13. Fox BD, Shimony A, Langleben D. Meta -analysis of monotherapy versus combination therapy for pulmonary arterial 
hypertension. Am J Cardiol. Oct 15 2011; 108(8): 1177- 82. PMID 21864815 
14. McLaughlin VV, Benza RL, Rubin LJ, et al. Addition of inhaled treprostini l to oral therapy for pulmonary arterial  hypertension: a 
randomized controlled clinical trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. May 04 2010; 55(18): 1915- 22. PMID20430262 
15. McLaughlin VV, Oudiz RJ, Frost A, et al. Randomized study of adding inhaled iloprost to existing bo sentan in  pulmonary arterial 
hypertension. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. Dec 01 2006; 174(11): 1257- 63. PMID 16946127 
16. Hoeper MM, Leuchte H, Halank M, et al. Combining inhaled iloprost with bosentan in patients with idiopathic  pulmonary 
arterial hypertension. Eur Respir J. Oct 2006; 28(4): 691- 4. PMID 17012628  
17. Vizza CD, Jansa P, Teal S, et al. Sildenafil dosed concomitantly with bosentan for adult pulmonary arterial  hypertension in a 
randomized controlled trial. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. Sep 06 2017; 17(1): 239. PMID 28874133 
18. McLaughlin V, Channick RN, Ghofrani HA, et al. Bosentan added to sildenafil therapy in patients with pulmonary  arterial 
hypertension. Eur Respir J. Aug 2015; 46(2): 405- 13. PMID 26113687 
19. Simonneau G, Rubin LJ, Galie N, et al. Addition of silde nafil to long -term intravenous epoprostenol therapy inpatients with 
pulmonary arterial hypertension: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. Oct 21 2008; 149(8): 521- 30.PMID 18936500 
20. Galie N, Muller K, Scalise AV, et al. PATENT PLUS: a blinded, randomised and extension study of riociguat plus sildenafil in 
pulmonary arterial hypertension. Eur Respir J. May 2015; 45(5): 1314 -22. PMID 25657022 
21. White RJ, Jerjes -Sanchez C, Bohns Meyer GM, et al. Combination Therapy with Oral Treprostinil for Pulmonary  Arterial 
Hype rtension. A Double -Blind Placebo -controlled Clinical Trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. Mar 15 2020;201(6): 707- 717. PMID 
31765604 
22. Galie N, Barbera JA, Frost AE, et al. Initial Use of Ambrisentan plus Tadalafil in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension. NEngl J M ed. 
Aug 27 2015; 373(9): 834- 44. PMID 26308684  
23. Humbert M, Barst RJ, Robbins IM, et al. Combination of bosentan with epoprostenol in pulmonary arterial  hypertension: 
BREATHE -2. Eur Respir J. Sep 2004; 24(3): 353- 9. PMID 15358690 
24. Hoeper MM, Mayer E, Simonneau  G, et al. Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension. Circulation. Apr 252006; 113(16): 
2011- 20. PMID 16636189 
25. Fedullo P, Kerr KM, Kim NH, et al. Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.Jun 15 2011; 183(12): 1605- 13. PMID 21330453 
26. Ghofrani HA, D'Armini AM, Grimminger F, et al. Riociguat for the treatment of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary  
hypertension. N Engl J Med. Jul 25 2013; 369(4): 319- 29. PMID 23883377  Page | 50  of 53  ∞ 27. Kim NH, D'Armini AM, Grimminger F, et al. Haemodynamic effects  of riociguat in inoperable/recurrent chronic  thromboembolic 
pulmonary hypertension. Heart. Apr 2017; 103(8): 599- 606. PMID 28011757 
28. Simonneau G, D'Armini AM, Ghofrani HA, et al. Riociguat for the treatment of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary  
hypertension:  a long -term extension study (CHEST -2). Eur Respir J. May 2015; 45(5): 1293- 302. PMID 25395036 
29. Sadushi -Kolici R, Jansa P, Kopec G, et al. Subcutaneous treprostinil for the treatment of severe non -operable  chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTRE PH): a double -blind, phase 3, randomised controlled trial.  Lancet Respir Med. 
Mar 2019; 7(3): 239- 248. PMID 30477763 
30. Nagaya N, Sasaki N, Ando M, et al. Prostacyclin therapy before pulmonary thromboendarterectomy in patients with  chronic 
thromboembolic pulm onary hypertension. Chest. Feb 2003; 123(2): 338- 43. PMID 12576349 
31. Kramm T, Eberle B, Krummenauer F, et al. Inhaled iloprost in patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary  hypertension: 
effects before and after pulmonary thromboendarterectomy. Ann Thora c Surg. Sep 2003; 76(3): 711- 8. PMID 12963183 
32. Reesink HJ, Surie S, Kloek JJ, et al. Bosentan as a bridge to pulmonary endarterectomy for chronic  thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. Jan 2010; 139(1): 85- 91. PMID 19660388  
33. Klinger  JR, Elliott CG, Levine DJ, et al. Therapy for Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension in Adults: Update of the  CHEST Guideline 
and Expert Panel Report. Chest. Mar 2019; 155(3): 565- 586. PMID 30660783 
34. Wiener RS, Ouellette DR, Diamond E, et al. An official American  Thoracic Society/American College of Chest  Physicians policy 
statement: the Choosing Wisely top five list in adult pulmonary medicine. Chest. Jun 2014;145(6): 1383 -1391. PMID 24889436  
35. Klings ES, Machado RF, Barst RJ, et al. An official American Thoracic Society clinical practice guideline: diagnosis,  risk 
stratification, and management of pulmonary hypertension of sickle cell disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.Mar 15 2014; 
189(6): 727- 40. PMID 24628312 
36. Dweik RA, Rounds S, Erzurum SC, et al. An official Ame rican Thoracic Society Statement: pulmonary  hypertension phenotypes. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. Feb 01 2014; 189(3): 345- 55. PMID 24484330 
37. Jaff MR, McMurtry MS, Archer SL, et al. Management of massive and submassive pulmonary embolism,iliofemoral deep vein  
thrombosis, and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: a scientific statement from  the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. Apr 26 2011; 123(16): 1788- 830. PMID 21422387 
38. Liqrev®(sildenafil) [Package Insert] . Farmville,NC; CMP Pharma,Inc. Revis ed April 2023.  
 
History   
 
Date  Comments  
06/25/98  Add to Prescription Drug Section - New Policy  
12/21/00  Replace Policy - Policy updated; policy statement revised to include new FDA 
approved indication for treatment of secondary PH.  
03/11/03  Replace Policy - Policy reviewed and updated with literature review; discussion of new 
drugs treprostinil and bosentan added.  Policy retitled to reflect discussion of new 
drugs.  
05/11/04  Replace Policy - Policy reviewed and updated; references added; no change in policy 
statement.  Page | 51  of 53  ∞ Date  Comments  
06/14/05  Replace Policy - Policy updated with policy statement revised to state that iloprost 
may be considered medically necessary reflecting FDA approval; references and codes 
added.  
02/06/06  Codes updated - No other changes . 
06/16/06  Update Scope and Disclaimer - No other changes.  
08/08/06  Replace Policy - Policy updated and policy revised to include sildenafil as a 
consideration for medically necessary treatment reflecting FDA approval; references 
added.  
08/21/06  Codes Updated - No other changes  
03/10/09  New PR Policy - New PR policy, replaces BC.5.01.09.  Policy statement updated to 
include Investigational statement relating to combination therapy and medically necessary statement regarding the prevention and/or healing of ischemic digital ulcers 
in individuals with severe Raynaud’s phenomenon. References added. Reviewed and 
recommended by P&T in November 2008.  
10/12/10  Replace Policy - Reviewed and recommended by OAP in August 2010 and P&T in 
September 2010. Policy revised with literature search; references with 2009 references renumbered. The policy statement has been updated: Tyvaso has been added to treprostinil policy statement; tadalafil (ADCIRCA) added as medically necessary; and a medically necessary statement has been added indicating all listed therapies for the 
prevention and/or healing of ischemic digital ulcers in individuals with severe 
Raynaud’s phenomenon secondary to scleroderma/systemic sclerosis and who are refractory to optimized dosing of at lea st two conventional pharmacotherapies. No 
other change in policy statements.  
11/10/11  Replace Policy – Policy updated with literature review; references 45 and 46 added. No 
change in policy statement. Reviewed by P&T September 27, 2011.  
11/13/12  Replace policy. Policy updated with literature search through July 2012. Policy title 
changed to: “ Advanced Therapies for Pharmacological Treatment of Pulmonary Arterial 
Hypertension .” Policy statement added that “use of other advanced therapies for the 
treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH/ WHO Group 1), including but not limited to imatinib and simvastatin, is considered investigational.” Policy statement on combination therapy reformatted as bulleted list; statement that each medication 
needs to be considered medically necessary was added.  Policy now aligns with BCBSA 
5.01.09, with an additional medically necessary policy statement allowing addressed  
therapies for the prevention and/or healing of ischemic digital ulcers in individuals 
with s evere Raynaud’s phenomenon secondary to scleroderma and who are refractory 
to optimized dosing . References updated to support policy statements. HCPCS code 
S0088 and ICD -10 codes added.  
08/15/13  Update Related Policies. Add 5.01.545.  
12/09/13  Replace pol icy. Policy completely rewritten to mirror BCBCSA policy 5.01.09; adding 
macitentan (OPSUMIT) oral ( PAH/ WHO Group 1 ) and riociguat (ADEMPAS ) (PAH/ Page | 52  of 53  ∞ Date  Comments  
WHO Group 1  and CTEPH/ WHO Group 4) to the list of drugs considered medically 
necessary. Description section  updated to provide supporting information to updates 
in Policy. References 54 -56 added. CPT code 93503 and HCPCS codes K0730, S0088, 
K0090, and S0155 removed; these do not apply specifically to the policy and are purely 
informational.  
12/17/14  Annual Re view. Policy updated with input from clinical reviewers; references 2, 14, and 
42 updated. ICD -10 PCS codes removed; not utilized in policy adjudication.  
01/05/15  Update Related Policies. Add 5.01.545.  
05/12/15  Annual Review. Policy updated with literatu re review through February 2, 2015; 
references 11, 32 -35, 49, 63-66, and 74 added; reference 36 updated. Oral treprostinil 
(Orenitram) added to medically necessary policy statement.  
01/01/17  Annual Review, approved December 13, 2016. Research did not yield additional 
evidence to prompt a change to the existing policy criteria. References section was 
updated with four additional articles.  
12/01 /17 Annual Review, approved November 21 , 2017. References section was updated with six 
additional articles  (references 80  - 85). Oral selexipag (Uptravi) added to medically 
necessary policy statement. Added HCPCS code J7686. *This policy varies slightly from 
the BCBSA reference policy.   
11/01 /18 Annual Review, approved October 26 , 2018. Clarified generic sildenafil and tadalafil 
use for PAH only. Use for ED is off-label. Literature review and updated references.  
04/01 /19 Interim Review, approved March 19 , 2019.  Added Alyq (tadalafil) to medical p olicy and 
removed Levitra (vardenafil).  Organized medications  to treat PAH  by therapeutic class.  
07/01 /19 Interim Review, approved June 4 , 2019.  Added generic ambrisentan , bosentan  and 
treprostinil to medical policy.  
10/01/ 19 Annual Review, approved September 5 , 2019. Added Veletri (epoprostenol) to medical 
policy.  
04/01/ 20 Annual  Review, approved March 19 , 2020. Reviewed prescribing information and 
conducted literature search from August 1, 2019, to February 28, 2020. No changes to 
coverage criteria.  
02/01/21  Annual Review, approved January 21 , 2021.  Reviewed prescribing information and 
conducted literature search from February 29, 2020, to January 1, 2021. No changes to 
coverage criteria.  
08/01/21  Coding update, Removed HCPC code S9347.  
10/01 /21 Interim Review, approved September 23 , 2021.  Added Uptravi (selexipag) IV dosage 
form to medical policy.  Added HCPC code J3490 for new dosage form for Uptravi and 
updated drug indication under HCPC code J3285 from Uptravi to Veletri.  
05/04/22 Minor update to related policy title 5.01.545 – changed from  “Cialis® (tadalafil) for 
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia ” to “Tadalafil Products for Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia ”. Page | 53  of 53  ∞ Date  Comments  
10/01 /22  Annual Review, approved  September 13 , 2022 . Added coverage for c ombination 
therapy with tadalafil and ambrisentan as first -line treatment  for individual s who have 
WHO Functional Class Groups II and III disease.  Added Tyvaso DPI (treprostinil) oral 
inhalation powder dosage form to the medical policy . Changed the wording  from 
"patient" to "individual" throughout the policy for standardization.  
02/01 /23 Interim  Review, approved January 23 , 2023.  Added Tadliq (tadalafil) 20 mg/5 mL oral 
suspension  to the list of PDE5 inhibitors .  
06/01/23  Annual  Review, approved May 22 , 2023. No new evidence was identified that would 
require changes to coverage criteria listed in this policy.  
07/01 /23 Interim Review, approved June 26 , 2023.  Added Liqrev ®(sildenafil) to 
phosphodiesterase -5 (PDE -5) inhibitors for the indication  of PAH WHO group 1 to 
match with the FDA label.  
 
Disclaimer : This medical policy is a guide in evaluating the medical necessity of a particular service or treatment. The 
Company ad opts policies after careful review of published peer -reviewed scientific literature, national guidelines and 
local standards of practice. Since medical technology is constantly changing, the Company reserves the right to review 
and update policies as appro priate. Member contracts differ in their benefits. Always consult the member benefit 
booklet or contact a member service representative to determine coverage for a specific medical service or supply. 
CPT codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighted by  the American Medical Association (AMA). © 2023  Premera 
All Rights Reserved.  
Scope : Medical policies are systematically developed guidelines that serve as a resource for Company staff when 
determining coverage for specific medical procedures, drugs or devic es. Coverage for medical services is subject to 
the limits and conditions of the member benefit plan. Members and their providers should consult the member benefit booklet or contact a customer service representative to determine whether there are any benefit limitations 
applicable to this service or supply. This medical policy does not apply to Medicare Advantage.  Premera Blue Cross is a n independent licensee of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association  serving businesses and residents of Alaska and Washington State, excluding C lark County.   
052493  (07-01-2021) Discrimination is Against the Law  
Premera Blue Cross  (Premera) complies with applicable Federal and Washington state civil rights laws and does not discriminate on the basis of race, 
color, national o rigin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation . Premera does not exclude people or treat them differently because of race, 
color, national origin, age, disability , sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation.  Premera  provides free aids and services to people with disabilities to 
communica te effectively with us, such as q ualified sign language interpreters  and w ritten information in other formats (large print, audio, accessible 
electronic formats, other formats) . Premera p rovides fre e language services to people whose primary language is not English, such as  qualified interpreters  
and i nformation written in other languages . If you need these services, contact the Civil Rights Coordinator.  If you believe that Premera has failed to 
provide these services or discriminated in another way on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation , 
you can file a grievance with:  Civil Rights Coordinator ─ Complaints and Appeals , PO Box 91102 , Seattle, WA 98111 , Toll free : 855-332-4535 , Fax: 425-918-5592 , 
TTY: 711 , Email  AppealsDepartmentInquiries@Premera.com . You can file a grievance in person or by mail, fax, or email.  If you need help filing a 
grievance, the Civil Rights Coordinator is available to help you.  You can also file a civil rights complaint with the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office for Civil Rights, electronically through the Office for Civil Righ ts Complaint Portal, available at  https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/portal/lobby.jsf , 
or by mail or phone at:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,  200 Independence Ave SW, Room 509F, HHH B uilding , Washington, D.C. 20201, 
1-800-368-1019,  800-537-7697 (TDD). Complaint forms are available at  http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/office/file/index.html .  
Washington  residents : You can also file a civil rights complaint wi th the Washington State Office of the Insurance Commissioner, electronically through 
the Office of the Insurance Commissioner Complaint Portal available at https://www.insurance.wa.gov/file -complaint -or-check -your-complaint -status , or by 
phone at 800 -562-6900, 360 -586-0241 (TDD). Complaint forms are available at https: //fortress.wa.gov/oic/onlineservices/cc/pub/complaintinformation.aspx .  
Alaska  residents : Contact the Alaska Division of Insurance via email at insurance@alaska.gov , or by phone at 907-269-7900 or 1 -800-INSURAK  (in-state, 
outside Anchorage) . 
Language Assistance  
ATENCIÓN : si habla español, tiene a su disposición servicios gratuitos de asistencia lingüística. Llame al 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
PAUNAWA : Kung nagsasalita ka ng Tagalog , maaari kang gumamit ng mga serbisyo ng tulong sa wika nang walang bayad. Tumawag sa  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
注意：如果您使用繁體中文，您可以免費獲得語言援助服務。請致電  800-722-1471  (TTY：711）。 
CHÚ Ý : Nếu bạn nói Tiếng Việt, có các dịch vụ hỗ trợ ngôn ngữ miễn phí dành cho b ạn.  Gọi số 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711). 
주의: 한국어를  사용하시는  경우, 언어 지원 서비스를  무료로  이용하실  수 있습니다 . 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711)  번으로  전화해  주십시오 . 
ВНИМАНИЕ : Если вы говорите на русском языке, то вам доступны бесплатные услуги перевода.  Звоните  800-722-1471  (телетайп: 711). 
LUS CEEV : Yog tias koj hais lus Hmoob , cov kev pab txog lus, muaj  kev pab dawb  rau koj. Hu rau 800-722-1471  (TTY:  711).  
MO LOU SILAFIA : Afai e te tautala  Gagana fa'a Sāmoa, o loo iai auaunaga  fesoasoan, e fai fua e leai se totogi, mo oe,  Telefoni mai:  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ໂປດຊາບ: ຖ້າວ່າ ທ່ານເວ ້າພາສາ ລາວ, ການບໍລິການຊ່ວຍເຫ  ຼື ອດ້ານພາສາ, ໂດຍບໍ່ເສ ັ ຽຄ່າ, ແມ່ນມ ີພ້ອມໃຫ້ທ່ານ. ໂທຣ 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711) . 
注意事項 ：日本語を話される場合、無料の言語支援をご利用いただけます。 800-722-1471  （TTY:711）まで、お電話にてご連絡ください。  
PAKDAAR : Nu saritaem ti Ilocano, ti serbisyo para ti baddang ti lengguahe nga awanan bayadna, ket sidadaan para kenyam.  Awagan ti  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
УВАГА!  Якщо ви розмовляєте українською мовою, ви можете звернутися до безкоштовної служби мовної підтримки.  Тел ефонуйте за 
номером 800 -722-1471  (телетайп:  711). 
ប្រយ័ត្ន៖   បរើសិនជាអ្នកនិយាយ  ភាសាខ្មែរ , បសវាជំនួយខ្ននកភាសា បោយមិនគិត្ឈ្ ន ួល គឺអាចមានសំរារ់រំបរ ើ អ្នក។  ចូរ ទូរស័ព្ទ   800-722-1471 ( TTY: 711)។ 
ማስታወሻ :  የሚናገሩት  ቋንቋ ኣማርኛ  ከሆነ የትርጉም  እርዳታ ድርጅቶች፣  በነጻ ሊያግዝዎት  ተዘጋጀተዋል፡  ወደ ሚከተለው  ቁጥር ይደውሉ  800-722-1471 (መስማት  ለተሳናቸው : 711). 
XIYYEEFFANNAA : Afaan  dubbattu  Oroomiffa , tajaajila  gargaarsa  afaanii , kanfaltiidhaan  ala, ni argama . Bilbilaa  800-722-1471 ( TTY: 711).  
ملحوظة:  إذا كنت تتحدث اذكر اللغة، فإن خدمات المساعدة اللغوية تتوافر لك بالمجان.  اتصل برقم   1471-722-800    :(رقم هاتف الصم والبكم711 .) 
ਧਿਆਨ  ਧਿਓ: ਜੇ ਤੁਸੀਂ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ  ਬੋਲਿੇ ਹੋ, ਤਾਂ ਭਾਸ਼ਾ ਧ ਿੱਚ ਸਹਾਇਤਾ  ਸੇ ਾ ਤੁਹਾਡੇ ਲਈ ਮੁਫਤ ਉਪਲਬਿ  ਹੈ। 800-722-1471 (TTY:  711) 'ਤੇ ਕਾਲ ਕਰੋ। 
เรียน : ถ้าคุณพูดภาษาไทยคุณสามารถใช้บริการช่วยเหลือทางภาษาได้ฟรี  โทร 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ACHTUNG : Wenn Sie Deutsch sprechen, stehen Ihnen kostenlos sprachliche Hilfsdienstleistungen zur Verfügung. Rufnummer: 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
UWAGA : Jeżeli mówisz po polsku, możesz skorzystać z bezpłatnej pomocy językowej. Zadzwoń pod numer 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATANSYON : Si w pale Kreyòl Ayisyen, gen sèvis èd pou lang ki disponib gratis pou ou.  Rele 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATTENTION  : Si vous parlez français, des services d'aide linguistique vous sont proposés gratuitement.  Appelez le 800 -722-1471  (ATS :  711).  
ATENÇÃO : Se fala português, encontram -se disponíveis serviços linguísticos, grátis.  Ligue para 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATTENZIONE : In caso la lingua parlata sia l'italiano, sono disponibili servizi di assistenza linguistica gratuiti. Chiamare il numero  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).   
 توجه: اگر به زبان فارسی گفتگو می کنید، تسهیالت زبانی بصورت رايگان برای شما فراهم می باشد. با   (TTY: 711) 1471-722-800   .تماس بگیريد 