Drug  and Biologic  Coverage Criteria  
Molina  Healthcare,  Inc. confidential  and proprietary  © 2022  
This document contains confidential and proprietary information of Molina Healthcare and cannot be reproduced, distributed, or printed without written permission from  
Molina  Healthcare.  This page  contains  prescription  brand  name  drugs  that are trademarks or registered  trademarks of pharmaceutical  manufacturers  that are not affiliated 
Page  1 of 7 with Molina  Healthcare.   
  
 
 
 
 
Apokyn, Kynmobi (apomorphine) 
 
Apokyn (apomorphine), Kynmobi  (apomorphine film) Effective  Date:  02/01/2015  
Last P&T Approval/Version:  04/27/2022 
Next  Review  Due By: 04/2023 
Policy  Number:  C6918-A 
 
 
 
 
Coverage for services,  procedures, medical  devices  and drugs  are dependent upon benefit eligibility  as 
outlined in the member's specific benefit plan. This Coverage Guideline must be read in its entirety to 
determine coverage eligibility, if any.  
This Coverage Guideline provides  information related to coverage determinations  only and does  not imply  
that a service or treatment is clinically appropriate or inappropriate. The provider and the member are responsible for al l decisions regarding the appropriateness of care. Providers should provide Molina 
Healthcare complete medical  rationale when requesting any exceptions  to these guidelines  
 
Documentation Requirements: 
Molina Healthcare reserves  the right to require that additional  documentation be made available as part of 
its coverage  determination; quality  improvement; and fraud; waste and abuse prevention processes. 
Documentation required may include, but is not limited to, patient records, test results and credentials of the provider  ordering or performing a drug or service.  Molina  Healthcare may deny  reimbursement or take 
additional appropriate action if the documentation provided does not support the initial determination that the drugs or services were medically necessary, not investigational or experimental, and otherwise within the scope of benefits afforded to the member, and/or the documentation demonstrates a pattern of billing  
or other practice that is inappropriate or ex cessive  
 
DIAGNOSIS:  
Advanced Parkinson’s  disease  
 
REQUIRED MEDICAL  INFORMATION:  
This clinical policy is consistent with standards of medical practice current at the time that this clinical  
policy was approved. If a drug within this policy receives an updated FDA label within the last 180 days, 
medical necessity for the member will be reviewed using the updated FDA label information along with 
state and federal  requirements, benefit being  administered and formulary  preferencing. Coverage  will be 
determined on a case-by case basis until the criteria can be updated through Molina Healthcare, Inc. clinical governance. Additional information may be required on a case-by -case basis to allow for 
adequate review  
 
A. PARKINSONS DISEASE: 
1. Diagnosis  of advanced Parkinson’s  disease  
INFORMATION  FOR REVIEWER- Advanced disease is defined as Stages  II to IV of the 5- 
stage Hoehnand Yahr scale in clinical  trials  
AND  
2. Member  is experiencing acute intermittent hypomobility  (defined as “off” episodes  characterized  
COVERAGE  POLICY  PRODUCTS  AFFECTED Drug  and Biologic  Coverage Criteria  
Molina  Healthcare,  Inc. confidential  and proprietary  © 2022  
This document contains confidential and proprietary information of Molina Healthcare and cannot be reproduced, distributed, or printed without written permission from  
Molina  Healthcare.  This page  contains  prescription  brand  name  drugs  that are trademarks or registered  trademarks of pharmaceutical  manufacturers  that are not affiliated 
Page  2 of 7 with Molina  Healthcare.   
 by muscle  stiffness, slow movements, or difficulty  starting movements)  despite optimized oral PD 
therapy. Clinical documentation required (includes clinical notes from the member’s medical  
records  including any applicable labs and/or tests, supporting the diagnosis).  
AND  
3. Documentation that the member  is currently  receiving levodopa and adjunctive therapy  with 
anti-Parkinson's agents [e.g., levodopa/carbidopa (Sinemet, Sinemet CR, Parcopa, etc); 
dopamine agonists (pramipexole [Mirapex, generics, Mirapex ER], ropinirole [Requip, 
generics, Requip XL]), Catechol -O-methyl transferase (COMT) inhibitor: i.e. entacapone 
[Comtan], tolcapone,Tasmar, Monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitors: i.e. selegiline, 
generics, or Eldepryl, Zelapar, rasagiline [Azilect], has been on optimized doses for the last 
30 days and  continues to experience “off”  periods  
AND  
4. Member is NOT concurrently taking a 5-HT3 antagonist [i.e., Zofran® (ondansetron), Kytril® (granisetron), Anzemet® (dolasetron), Aloxi® (palonosetron), and Lotronex® (alosetron)] AND has a concurrent prescription  order for trimethobenzamide to pre-medicate for theinitial  
doses  of apomorphine as  needed  
AND  
5. Prescriber attests to (or the clinical reviewer has found that) the member not having any FDA 
labeled contraindications that haven’t been addressed by the prescriber within the documentation 
submitted for review  [Contraindications  to Apokyn, Kynmobi  (apomorphine)  include: Concomitant 
use of APOKYN with 5HT3 antagonists, including antiemetics (e.g., ondansetron, granisetron, 
dolasetron, palonosetron) and alosetron, Hypersensitivity  to apomorphine or any of its ingredients  
including sodium  metabisulfite]  
AND  
6. FOR APOKYN REQUESTS: Member has tried and failed (lack of efficacy after reaching the 
highest  tolerated dose for 3 days)  or has a labeled contraindication to Kynmobi  (apomorphine film) 
 
CONTINUATION OF THERAPY:  
A. PARKINSONS DISEASE: 
1. Adherence to therapy at least 85% of the time as verified by Prescriber and member’s  
medication fill history  (review Rx history  for compliance)  [MOLINAMEDICAL/PHARMACY  
REVIEWER TO  VERIFY] 
AND  
2. Documentation of stabilization or improvement from Apokyn, Kynmobi  (apomorphine)                     therapy as  
evaluated by a neurologist  (e.g., an improvement in motor  function)  
AND  
3. Member is still concurrently receiving levodopa and adjunctive therapy with anti -Parkinson's  
agents [e.g., levodopa/carbidopa (Sinemet, Sinemet CR, Parcopa, etc); dopamine agonists  
(pramipexole [Mirapex, generics, Mirapex ER], ropinirole [Requip, generics, Requip XL]), Catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT)  inhibitor: i.e., entacapone [Comtan],tolcapone,Tasmar, 
Monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitors: i.e., selegiline, generics, or Eldepryl, Zelapar, rasagiline  [Azilect]  
 
DURATION OF APPROVAL: 
Initial  authorization: 6 months, Continuation of therapy: 12 months  
 
PRESCRIBER REQUIREMENTS:  
 Prescribed by, or in consultation with, a board-certified neurologist, or physician who has expertise in 
movement disorders. Submit  consultation notes  if applicable  
 
AGE  RESTRICTIONS:  
18 years  of age and older 
 
 Drug  and Biologic  Coverage Criteria  
Molina  Healthcare,  Inc. confidential  and proprietary  © 2022  
This document contains confidential and proprietary information of Molina Healthcare and cannot be reproduced, distributed, or printed without written permission from  
Molina  Healthcare.  This page  contains  prescription  brand  name  drugs  that are trademarks or registered  trademarks of pharmaceutical  manufacturers  that are not affiliated 
Page  3 of 7 with Molina  Healthcare.   
 DRUG  INFORMATION 
APPENDIX  QUANTITY:  
Maximum single dose of Apokyn (apomorphine hydrochloride) is 0.6 mL (6 mg). Maximum total daily  
dose is 2ml  (20mg)  
4 cartons  of 3-mL  cartridges, 5 cartridges  per carton (60mL per month). Only a 1-month supply  may 
be dispensed at a time 
Maximum single dose of KYNMOBI is 30 mg. Do not administer more  than 5 doses  per day 
Only a  1-month supply  may be dispensed at a time  
 
PLACE  OF ADMINISTRATION:  
The recommendation is that subcutaneous  injectable and sublingual  medications  in this policy  will be for 
pharmacy benefit coverage and patient self-administered.  
 
 
ROUTE  OF ADMINISTRATION:  
Subcutaneous, Sublingual  
 
DRUG  CLASS: 
 Non-ergoline Dopamine Receptor  Agonists  
 
FDA-APPROVED  USES: 
Apokyn (apomorphine injection)  
Indicated for the acute, intermittent treatment of hypomobility, “off” episodes  (“end-of- dose wearing-off”  and 
unpredictable “on-off”  episodes)  associated with advanced Parkinson disease. 
Apokyn has been studied as an adjunct to other Parkinson disease  medications.  
 
Kynmobi  (apomorphine sublingual  film) 
indicated for the acute, intermittent treatment of “off” episodes  in patients  with Parkinson’s  disease  
 
COMPENDIAL  APPROVED OFF-LABELED USES: 
None 
 
 
APPENDIX:  
APPENDIX  1: Hoehn and Yahr  Scale 
Two rating scales are commonly used to stage PD. The Hoehn and Yahr staging scale a was developed 
and was published in 1967 as a method of designating the severity of Parkinsonism to assess progression and severity  of the disease and is still a widely  used clinical rating scale.c  Among its advantages are that it 
is simple and easily applied. It captures typical patterns of progressive motor impairment which can be 
applied whether or not patients are receiving dopaminergic therapy. Progression in HY stages has been found to correlate with motor decline, deterioration in quality of life, and neuroimaging studies of  
dopaminergic loss. However, because of its simplicity and lack of detail, the scale is not comprehensive. It  
is also limited by its focus on issues of unilateral versus bilateral disease and the presence or absence of postural  reflex  impairment, thereby  leaving other  specific  aspects  of motor  deficit unassessed. Also it does  Drug  and Biologic  Coverage Criteria  
Molina  Healthcare,  Inc. confidential  and proprietary  © 2022  
This document contains confidential and proprietary information of Molina Healthcare and cannot be reproduced, distributed, or printed without written permission from  
Molina  Healthcare.  This page  contains  prescription  brand  name  drugs  that are trademarks or registered  trademarks of pharmaceutical  manufacturers  that are not affiliated 
Page  4 of 7 with Molina  Healthcare.   
 BACKGROUND AND  OTHER CONSIDERATIONS  not provide any information concerning non-motor  aspects  of PD. A modified version  of HY is sometimes  
used.  
 
It has five stages: from I (unilateral signs are present) to V (patient confined to a bed or chair unless  
assisted). The Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) is a more comprehensive and complex  
PD assessment tool. The three main  sections  of the UPDRS  (Mentation, Behavior, and Mood; Activities of 
Daily Living; and Motor Examination) contain 42 patient interview questions in broad categories, with a 
higher  total score  representing worse  overall  disability  (a score  of 0 = no disability).  
 
There are other scales for grading the severity of Parkinsonism: The Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating 
Scale (UPDRS), the modified Columbia Scale, The Webster Scale, The Schwab and England Disability  
Scale, the Northwestern University  Disability  Scale  and numerous  others, each having  it’s own proponents  
and usefulness.  
 
The purpose of both the UPDRS and Hoehn and Yahr scale is to provide a snapshot of the patient's  
condition at the time point at which they are used and are not meant to suggest a timeframe of disease progression. Importantly, the score of the UPDRS can vary within the same patient hour to hour dependent on correlation of medication schedule with the assessment interval.  
 
In Apokyn (apomorphine)clinical  trials, 75% of patients  were  classified  as Stage II or III on the Hoehn and 
Yahr scale, and 22% of the patients  were Stage IV. 
 
 
BACKGROUND:  
Summary of Disease 
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurologic disease characterized by tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia. B,C 
PD is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by a loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia  nigra, as  
well as other dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic areas of the brain.1 PD isa common disorder with an 
estimated prevalence of up to 329 per 100,000. 1 Because PD is progressive and results in significant 
disability 10 to 15 years after onset, the financial and social burden of PD is  substantial, particularly  with 
the aging population.  
The cardinal motor features of PD are tremor, bradykinesia, and rigidity.3 Several types of medications  
are used in the symptomatic  treatment of PD, such  as levodopa/carbidopa, dopamine agonists, 
monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitors (e.g., selegiline), amantadine, and anticholinergic 
agents.B,3 Initial dopaminergic therapy usually provides good control of motor  symptoms, but is 
eventually complicated by  motor fluctuations including “off” time (return of PD symptoms  when 
medication effect wears  off) and dyskinesia (drug-induced involuntary  
Drug  and Biologic  Coverage Criteria  
Molina  Healthcare,  Inc. confidential  and proprietary  © 2022  
This document contains confidential and proprietary information of Molina Healthcare and cannot be reproduced, distributed, or printed without written permission from  
Molina  Healthcare.  This page  contains  prescription  brand  name  drugs  that are trademarks or registered  trademarks of pharmaceutical  manufacturers  that are not affiliated 
Page  5 of 7 with Molina  Healthcare.   
 movements).3 Medications that may be used to reduce off time include entacapone (catechol -O- 
methyltransferase inhibitor), MAO -B inhibitors, dopamine agonists, and apomorphine.3 Parkinson's 
disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated with the loss of dopaminergic  cells 
(cells  which  produce dopamine)  in the substantia  nigra region  of the brain.  
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that the brain uses to help direct and control movement. In Parkinson's 
disease, these dopamine producing nerve cells break down, dopamine levels  drop, and brain signals  
directing movement become abnormal. The incidence and prevalence  of PD increases with age. The 
average age of onset is approximately 60 years. Onset in persons younger than 40 years is relatively 
uncommon. Patients notice symptoms related to progressive bradykinesia (slow movements and 
reflexes), rigidity, and gait difficulty  eventually  leading  to dementia Treatment Goals  
There is no cure for Parkinson’s disease, however pharmacological agents, physical therapy, and 
surgical  interventions  can help control  symptoms  and improve quality  of life. The central  objective  of using 
Parkinson’s  disease medication is to control  or manage motor  symptoms. 
There are no established disease-modifying or neuroprotective therapies.9 
Pharmacologic Agents/Conventional Therapy 
There are a wide number of symptomatic treatments that are available for PD, including 
pharmacological therapy, surgical procedures, physiotherapy, occupational therapy and other support 
services. All of these treatments can have a significant impact on improving an affected individual’s  
quality of life and should be available. However, despite the increase in non- pharmacological  
treatments, an individual with Parkinson’s becomes more reliant on their medication to maintain their  
ability to function as the disease progresses. A balance between the side effects of the medication and 
the benefit often becomes more challenging with time. The current pharmacological treatment options  
for Parkinson’s disease include levodopa/carbidopa, dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, pramipexole, 
ropinirole), or cathechol -O-methyltransferace (COMT) inhibitors (entacapone, tolcapone). Initial  
treatments often include low doses of carbidopa/levodopa or a dopamine agonist. Levodopa is still the most effective medication available for treatment of motor symptoms in PD. Patients will eventually  
need levodopa in their therapeutic regimen as their PD progresses. Levodopa is a first-line medication 
for PD. The combination of carbidopa and levodopa (Sinemet, Sinemet CR, Parcopa, etc) is the most 
effective agent available for the treatment of motor symptoms. However, its early use is associated with 
earlier development of dyskinesias (abnormal involuntary movements). Levodopa-carbidopa (Sinemet, 
SinemetCR, Parcopa, etc) can be used first line, especially  in elderly  patients.  
 
This period of good control  lasts approximately  five years  with levodopa, after which  motor  fluctuations  
(e.g., wearing off, on-off phenomenon) and dyskinesias develop. Eventually the drugs are not as  
effective in many patients since Parkinson’s is a progressive disease. Suboptimal control can be 
managed by increasing the dose of the dopamine agonist or levodopa; however, this approach 
increases the chance of dopamine agonist side effects (e.g., neuropsychiatric side effects, sedation, 
sleep attacks).4 It can also cause  or worsen dopamine-associated dyskinesias.  
 
As the disease progresses, however, therapy becomes more complex, requiring dosage adjustments, 
incorporation of multiple medications, and the use of rescue treatments. Initial  therapy generally  
becomes less  effective and additional motor complications develop, including dyskinesias and motor  
fluctuations. "On time" refers to the time when medication is effectively controlling the disease's  
symptoms, and "off time" occurs when disease symptoms recur gradually or abruptly. AsPD progresses, 
on time becomes  shorter, causing complications  that can impair quality  of life. 
Within  4 to 5 years  of treatment with standard Parkinson's  drug treatments, many  patients  experience Drug  and Biologic  Coverage Criteria  
Molina  Healthcare,  Inc. confidential  and proprietary  © 2022  
This document contains confidential and proprietary information of Molina Healthcare and cannot be reproduced, distributed, or printed without written permission from  
Molina  Healthcare.  This page  contains  prescription  brand  name  drugs  that are trademarks or registered  trademarks of pharmaceutical  manufacturers  that are not affiliated 
Page  6 of 7 with Molina  Healthcare.   
 CODING/BILLING  INFORMATION  episodes of hypomobility (e.g., inability to rise from a chair, to speak, or to walk). The episodes can 
occur  toward the end of a dosing interval  with standard medications  (so-called "end- of-dose wearing off") 
or at unpredictable times (spontaneous "on/off" periods). The intensity, duration and frequency of "off"  
episodes vary for each patient. Therefore, most clinicians prefer to use a combination of agents rather  
than increase the dose of a single  agent after the initial  “honeymoon.” 
Dopamine agonists are another option for the treatment of PD. These agents act directly on 
dopamine receptors and are associated with a lower incidence of dyskinesias. There are 2 
subclasses of dopamine agonists: Non-ergot-derived agonists (pramipexole and ropinirole); the ergot-derived drugs (bromocriptine, cabergoline, lisuride and pergolide). Apomorphine is not used first-line  and is considered in the section 'Adjuvant therapy  for more  advanced Parkinson's  disease', 
below. 
Apokyn (apomorphine)  is a non-ergot dopamine  agonist indicated for the acute treatment of “off ’’ 
episodes  associated with advanced PD. 
 
The efficacy of Kynmobi was evaluated in one, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel - 
group study. The study included an open-label titration phase where patients received a starting dose of 
10 mg which  could be increased on subsequent  days  in 5 mg increments  to a maximum  of 35 mg until a 
full “on“ response was achieved and the dose was tolerated. Patients were then randomized to recei ve 
the effective dose or placebo in a 12 -week double-blind maintenance phase. The primary efficacy  
endpoint was the in-clinic mean change in the Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS -UPDRS), Part III Score from pre-dose to 30 min post-dose at the 12-week visit. The 
MDS -UPDRS, Part III Score is designed to assess severity  of classic  motor  findings  seen in Parkinson’s  
disease (e.g., tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, postural instability) with a higher score indicating more severe disease. 
The mean change in MDS -UPDRS, Part III Scores from pre-dose to 30 minutes post-dose was  
statistically significant in the Kynmobi group compared to placebo. (See table below). At week 12, significant differences in MDS- UPDRS, Part III scores from placebo were observed as early as 15  
minutes  post-dose (first measured time point) and continued up to 90 minutes  (last measured time 
point). 
The response rate of self -rated full on  response within 30 min at week 12 was 35% in the Kynmobi  
group vs. 16% in the placebo group (OR 2.81, 95% CI 1.04 to 7.64, p=0.043). The response rate of self- 
rated full on response within 30 minutes with effect lasting for 30 minutes at week 12 was 31% in  
patients  receiving Kynmobi  and 14% in the placebo  group (OR 2.80, 95% CI 1.00 to 7.84, p=0.050). 
 
CONTRAINDICATIONS/EXCLUSIONS/DISCONTINUATION:  
All other uses  of Apokyn  (apomorphine)  are considered experimental/investigational  and therefore, will 
follow  Molina’s Off- Label policy.  
Authorization will not be granted if ANY of the following conditions  apply  [ANY]: Non-FDA approved 
indications, Hypersensitivity to apomorphine or components of its formulation (notably sodium  
metabisulfite), Concomitant use with a serotonin 5-HT3 -type receptor antagonists (such as  ondansetron, 
granisetron, solasetron, palonosetron or alosetron) which could result in profound hypotension and loss of 
consciousness, Test dose of Apokyn (apomorphine) caused clinically  significant orthostatic  hypotension, 
Prescribed as monotherapy as  a first-line agent.  
 
OTHER  SPECIAL  CONSIDERATIONS:  
None 
 
 
Note: 1) This list of codes may not be all -inclusive. 2) Deleted codes and codes which are not 
effective at the time the service  is rendered may not be eligible for reimbursement Drug  and Biologic  Coverage Criteria  
Molina  Healthcare,  Inc. confidential  and proprietary  © 2022  
This document contains confidential and proprietary information of Molina Healthcare and cannot be reproduced, distributed, or printed without written permission from  
Molina  Healthcare.  This page  contains  prescription  brand  name  drugs  that are trademarks or registered  trademarks of pharmaceutical  manufacturers  that are not affiliated 
Page  7 of 7 with Molina  Healthcare.   
 REFERENCES   
HCPCS  
CODE  DESCRIPTION 
J0364  Injection, apomorphine  hydrochloride,  1 mg 
 
 
AVAILABLE  DOSAGE  FORMS : 
Apokyn SOCT  30MG/3ML, Kynmobi  FILM  25MG  (30ct), Kynmobi  FILM  20MG(30ct),  Kynmobi  FILM  
15MG(30ct), Kynmobi Titration Kit 10/15/20/25/30MG (10ct), Kynmobi FILM 10MG(30ct), Kynmobi  
FILM  30MG(30ct) 
 
 
1. Apokyn (apomorphine)  [prescribing information].  Louisville,  KY: US World Meds;  April 2020 
2. KYNMOBI(TM)  sublingual  film, apomorphine HCl sublingual  film. Sunovion Pharmaceuticals  Inc(per FDA), 
Marlborough, MA, August 2021  
3. Suchowersky O, Reich S, Perlmutter J, et al. Practice Parameter: diagnosis and prognosis of new onset 
Parkinson disease (an evidence-based review): report of the Quality Standards  Subcommittee of the 
American Academy of  Neurology.  Neurology.  2006;66:968- 975. 
4. Stowe  R, Ives N, Clarke CE, et al. Evaluation of the efficacy  and safety  of adjuvant  treatment to levodopa 
therapy in Parkinson’s disease patients with motor complications. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2010;(7): CD007166. 
5. Pahwa R, Factor SA, Lyons KE, et al. Practice parameter: treatment of Parkinson disease with motor 
fluctuations and dyskinesia (an evidence-based review): report of the Quality  Standards Subcommittee 
of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2006;66(7):983-995. 
 
SUMMARY OF REVIEW/REVISIONS  DATE  
REVISION- Notable revisions:  
Required Medical Information 
FDA Approved Uses  
   Quarter 2 2022  
Q2 2022 Established tracking in new 
format  Historical changes on file  
  
 