1
Medical Policy Reference Manual
Medical Policy
2.01.073 Autologous Stem Cell Therapy for Peripheral Artery Disease
Original MPC Approval:09/21/2015
Last Review Date:        03/01/2022
Last Revision Date:      03/01/2022
Description
The buildup of fatty plaques on the interior surface of the arteries of the lower extremities, known as atherosclerosis, 
leads to peripheral artery disease (PAD), also known as peripheral vascular disease (PVD).  This is a common disorder 
that can affect both men and women, although it is more often seen in men over age 50.  Contributing factors include 
diabetes, high cholesterol, hypertension, and smoking. PAD is characterized by narrowing and stiffening of the vessels, 
leading to reduced circulation to the muscles, which in turn leads to pain, achiness, fatigue, and burning sensation of 
the legs and feet.  The legs may also appear pale and cool to the touch. The symptoms, referred to as claudication, 
usually appear during exercise, and go away after rest. As the disease advances, the stage of critical limb ischemia 
(CLI) may be reached, with severe pain even at rest, ulcers of the skin, muscular atrophy, and significant risk for loss 
of the limb.
Treatment for most cases of PAD is conservative, with lifestyle changes and medications.  Exercise is particularly 
important to stimulate development of collateral vessels to increase blood supply (angiogenesis and arteriogenesis).  
Surgery in the form of arterial stent placement or vascular bypass surgery is considered in more severe cases, with 
limb amputation reserved as a last resort.
The use of peripheral or bone marrow-derived hematopoetic stem cells has been studied as a method of inducing 
arteriogenesis by enhancement of the physiological repair mechanism.  Various types of stem cells have been 
evaluated, including:
• adipose-derived stem cells
• bone marrow-derived mononuclear cells
• bone marrow stem cells
• cytokine-mobilized CD133+ cells
• granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) cells
• in vitro-expanded, peripheral blood-derived, autologous stem cells
Policy
Stem cell therapy for peripheral arterial disease / peripheral vascular disease is considered experimental / 
investigational as it does not meet TEC criteria #2-5. 
Policy Guidelines
Experimental/Investigational
The term "experimental/investigational" describes services or supplies that are in the developmental stage and are in
the process of human or animal testing. Services or supplies that do not meet all 5 of the criteria listed below adopted
by the BlueCross BlueShield Association Technology Evaluation Center (TEC) are deemed to be
experimental/investigational:
1. The technology* must have final approval from the appropriate U.S. government regulatory bodies; and
2. The scientific evidence must permit conclusions concerning the effect of the technology on health outcomes; and
3. The technology must improve the net health outcome; and
4. The technology must be as beneficial as any established alternatives; and
5. The improvement must be attainable outside the investigational settings.2* Technology includes drugs, devices, processes, systems, or techniques
Rationale:
1.  The technology must have final approval from the appropriate government regulatory bodies:  
Injection of autologous stem cells is a procedure and is therefore not subject to FDA regulation.  However, devices 
used for cell separation may be subject to FDA regulation, and certain such devices are undergoing various stages of 
clinical trials for purposes of FDA labeling for treatment of PAD.  The FDA notes in their general article on stem cells 
and their regulation that there are currently no FDA-licensed stem cell treatments.
2.   The scientific evidence must permit conclusions concerning the effect on health outcomes:  
The primary outcome measure in stem therapy studies is amputation-free survival.  Other outcomes for evaluating CLI 
include the Rutherford criteria for limb status, healing of ulcers, the ankle-brachial index (ABI), transcutaneous oxygen 
pressure, and pain-free walking.  The Rutherford criteria include ankle and toe pressures, level of claudication, rest 
pain, non-healing of ulcer, and gangrene.
The available published studies to date consist mainly of small trials.  Most trials focused on the use of bone marrow 
mononuclear cells.  Of these, there were two prospective clinical studies (n=20 and n=18, respectively), and one 
controlled comparison study (n=39).  Two studies evaluated cytokine-mobilized cells in one double-blind randomized 
controlled trial (RCT) (n=10) and an uncontrolled clinical study (n=9).  Two studies examined GCSF-mobilized stem 
cells in 2 phase I/II clinical trials, n=17 and n=18 respectively. The double-blind RCT yielded results that the authors 
concluded were a non-significant effect on outcomes measures as compared with sham treatment; they concluded the 
approach was likely futile.
Two phase I/II prospective studies were reported using GCSF-mobilized CD-34+ cells.  It was not reported whether 
any adjunctive therapies were employed.  Follow-up periods extended as long as 208 weeks in one study, and only 
twelve weeks in the other.  These were small studies, but the authors in both cases concluded the treatment was 
feasible and safe, with improvement in outcomes measures such as reduced amputations and improvements in pain 
and ischemia.
A small (n=20) open-label randomized study employed peripheral autologous stem cells using the VesCell system.  
The authors reported that after 3 months six amputations were performed on control group patients but none in the 
study group.  After two years, 3 amputations had been performed in the treatment group.  Other outcomes measures 
including change in pain score, wound healing and walking ability were also improved in the treatment group.
Overall, the published studies to date are best described as pilot-level or feasibility-type studies, with small sample 
sizes, lack of blinding, and lack of detail regarding control groups.  More study using improved designs are needed to 
reach conclusions regarding health outcomes.  Also, there needs to be some conclusions as to the optimal source for 
stem cells as there is conflicting outcomes information.
3.  The technology must improve the net health outcome:  
The studies so far suggest that stem cell therapy for PAD is a safe procedure, and possibly effective.  However, the 
studies are small and somewhat weak in design, so there is insufficient evidence to make any judgments about 
improvements in the net health outcomes.
4.  The technology must be as effective as any established alternatives:  
With advanced cases of PAD, where CLI is being experienced, the patient may be offered stent placement or bypass 
surgery.  It is not known if stem cell therapy is intended as an adjunct to medical and / or surgical care, or whether it is 
intended as a stand-alone treatment.  Patient selection criteria will need to be established so the role of stem cell 
therapy can be defined, if at all.  Currently the evidence does not establish that stem cell therapy is at least as effective 
as conventional treatments.
5.  The improvement must be attainable outside the investigational settings: 
The available evidence has not established a net health improvement in the investigational settings.
Update 2017:
A search of the peer-reviewed literature was conducted from April 2015 through July 2017.  Findings in the recent 
literature do not change the above conclusion.  Therefore, the policy statement is unchanged. 3Update 2019:
A search of the peer-reviewed literature was conducted from August 2017 through August 2019.  Findings in the recent 
literature do not change the above conclusion.  Therefore, the policy statement is unchanged.
Update 2022:
A search of literature was conducted from September 2019 through December 2021. Findings in the recent literature 
do not change the above conclusion. Therefore, the policy statement is unchanged.
Benefit Applications
There are no benefit application guidelines for this Medical Policy.
Provider Guidelines
There are no Provider Guidelines for this Medical Policy.
Cross References to Related Policies and Procedures
There are no Related Policies for this Medical Policy.
References
The following were among the resources reviewed and considered in developing this policy.  By reviewing and 
considering the resources, CareFirst does not in any way endorse the contents thereof nor assume any liability 
or responsibility in connection therewith.  The opinions and conclusions of the authors of these resources are 
their own and may or may not be in agreement with those of CareFirst.
Aboyans, V., Ricco, J.B., Bartelink, M.E.L., Björck, M., Brodmann, M., Cohnert, T., … ESC Scientific Document Group. 
(2018, March). 2017 ESC Guidelines on the Diagnosis and Treatment of Peripheral Arterial Diseases, in collaboration 
with the European Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS): Document covering atherosclerotic disease of extracranial 
carotid and vertebral, mesenteric, renal, upper and lower extremity arteries. Endorsed by: the European Stroke 
Organization (ESO)The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Peripheral Arterial Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC) and of the European Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS). European Heart Journal, 
39(9):763-816. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx095.
Franz, R.W., Shah, K.J., Pin, R.H., Hankins, T., Hartman, J.F., Wright, M.L.  (2015, September).  Autologous bone 
marrow mononuclear cell implantation therapy is an effective limb salvage strategy for patients with severe peripheral 
arterial disease.  Journal of Vascular Surgery, 62(3):673-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2015.02.059.
Gao, W., Chen, D., Liu, G., Ran, X. (2019, May). Autologous stem cell therapy for peripheral arterial disease: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Stem Cell Research & Therapy. 10(1):140. doi: 
10.1186/s13287-019-1254-5.
Horie, T. Yamazaki, S., Hanada, S., Kobayashi, S., Tsukamoto, T., Haruna, T., … Japan Study Group of Peripheral 
Vascular Regeneration Cell Therapy (JPRCT). (2018, July).  Outcome from a randomized controlled clinical trial- 
improvement of peripheral arterial disease by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-mobilized autologous peripheral-
blood-mononuclear cell transplantation (IMPACT). Circulation Journal, 82(8):2165-2174. PMID 29877199
Knoshita, M., Fujita, Y., Katayama, M., et al (2012). Long-term clinical outcome after intramuscular transplantation of 
granulocyte colony stimulating factor-mobilized CD34 positive cells in patients with critical limb ischemia. 
Atherosclerosis 224, 440-5.
Peeters Weem, S.M., Teraa, M., de Borst, G.J., Verhaar, M.C., Moll, F.L.  (2015, Dec).  Bone marrow derived cell 
therapy in critical limb ischemia: A meta-analysis of randomized placebo controlled trials.  European Journal of Vascular 
and Endovascular Surgery : The Official Journal of the European Society for Vascular Surgery,  50(6):775-83. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejvs.2015.08.018. Epub 2015 Oct 12.4Perin, E.C., Murphy, M.P., March, K.L., Bolli, R., Loughran, J., Yang, P.C., . . .  Cardiovascular Cell Therapy Research 
Network (CCTRN).  (2017, April).  Evaluation of cell therapy on exercise performance and limb perfusion in peripheral 
artery disease:  The CCTRN PACE Trial (patients with intermittent claudication injected with ALDH bright cells).  
Circulation, 135(15):1417-1428. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.025707. Epub 2017 Feb 16.
Poole, J., Mavromatis, K., Binongo, J.N., et al (2013). Effect of progenitor cell mobilization with granulocyte-macrophage 
colony stimulating factor in patients with peripheral artery disease: a randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American 
Medical Association 310, 2631-9.
Powell, R.J., Marston, W.A., Berceli, S. A. et al (2012). Cellular therapy with ixomycel-T to treat critical limb ischemia: 
The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled RESTORE-CLI trial. Molecular Therapy 20, 1280-6.
Powell, R.J. (2012). Update on clinical trials evaluating the effect of biologic therapy in patients with critical limb 
ischemia.  Journal of Vascular Surgery 56, 264-6.
Raval, A.N., Schmuck, E.G., Tefera, G. et al (2014)Bilateral administration of autologous CD133+ cells in ambulatory 
patients with refractory critical limb ischemia: Lessons learned from a pilot, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial.  Cytotherapy 16, 1720-32.
Rigato, M., Monami, M., Fadini, G. P.  (2017, January).  Autologous cell therapy for peripheral arterial Disease:  
Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized, non-randomized, and non-controlled studies. Circulation 
Research, https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.309045
Teraa, M., Sprengers, R.W., Schutgens, R.E., Slaper-Cortenbach, .I.C., van der Graaf, Y., Algra. A., . . . Verhaar, M.C.  
(2015).  Effect of repetitive intra-arterial infusion of bone marrow mononuclear cells in patients with no-option limb 
ischemia: the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Rejuvenating Endothelial Progenitor Cells via 
Transcutaneous Intra-arterial Supplementation (JUVENTAS) trial.  Circulation, 131(10):851-60. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.012913.
UptoDate  (2019, April)  Investigational therapies for treating symptoms of lower extremity peripheral artery disease. 
Author:  Hess, C.N., Hiatt, W.R.
Xie B, Luo H, Zhang Y, Wang, Q., Zhou, C., Xu, D. (2018). Autologous stem cell therapy in critical limb ischemia: A 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Stem Cells International, 2018:7528464. PMID 29977308
Wang, Z., Li, D., Cao, J-X., et al (2014). Efficacy of autologous bone marrow mononuclear cell therapy in patients with 
peripheral arterial disease. Journal of Atherosclerosis and Thrombosis 21, 1183-96. 
This policy statement relates only to the services or supplies described herein.  Coverage will vary from 
contract to contract and by line of business and should be verified before applying the terms of the policy.