 
PHARMACY  / MEDICAL  POLICY – 5.01.548  
Pharmacotherapy of Cushing’s Disease and Acromegaly 
Effective Date:  Feb. 1 , 2023  
Last Revised:  Jan. 23, 2023  
Replaces:  N/A RELATED POLICIES:  
None  
 
Select a hyperlink below to be directed to that section.  
POLICY CRITERIA   |  DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS  |  CODING  
RELATED INFORMATION   |  EVIDENCE REVIEW   |  REFERENCES  |  HISTORY  
∞ Clicking this icon returns you to the hyperlinks menu above.  
 
Introduction  
The pituitary gland is about the size of a pea. It’s just behind the bridge of the nose and is 
attached to the brain with nerve fibers. Despite its small size, it plays a very large role in 
controlling other glands throughout the body. For this reason, the pituitary is often called the 
master gland. The pituitary gland also produces other hormones, including ACTH and growth hormone. I n Cushing’s disease, a pituitary tumor causes the pituitary gland  to produce too much 
ACTH. The ACTH then signals the adrenal  glands to produce cortisol. Removing the tumor often 
allows the pituitary gland to return to producing normal levels of ACTH, which then lowers the cortisol levels. Acromegaly is a condition that results in enlargement of the hands, feet, and face. 
It’s caused by the pituitary gland producing too much growth hormone. A noncancerous tumor 
on the pituitary gland is the most common cause of acromegaly. Specific drugs may be used to 
treat Cushing’s disease or acromegaly when surgery or other medications didn’t  work or can’t 
be used. This policy describes when specific drugs to treat these conditions may be considered 
medically necessary.  
 
Note:    The Introduction section is for your general knowledge and is not to be taken  as policy coverage criteria. The 
rest of the policy uses specific words and concepts familiar to medical professionals. It is intended for 
providers . A provider can be a person, such as a doctor, nurse, psychologist, or dentist. A provider also can 
be a place where medical care is given, like a hospital, clinic, or lab.  This policy informs them about when a 
service may be covered.  
 
5.01.548_PBC (01-23-2023) 
 
 
   
 
 
   
Page | 2 of 28  ∞ Policy Coverage Criteria   
 
Drug  Medical Necessity  
Bynfezia ® Pen (octreotide) 
SC Bynfezia® Pen (octreotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for treatment of acromegaly when the following 
conditions are met:  
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Documented diagnosis of acromegaly established by one  of 
the following tests: o Elevated serum insulin -like growth factor -1 (IGF -1) 
o Inadequate suppression of growth hormone levels (> 1 ng/mL) two hours after oral glucose tolerance test  
AND  
• Had an inadequate response to  surgery or radiation therapy or 
surgery and radiation therapy is not appropriate 
AND  
• The individual has tried generic octreotide first and ha d an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic octreotide 
 
Bynfezia® Pen (octreotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for the treatment of adult individuals wit h 
unresectable, locally advanced or metastatic gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors  (GEP-NETs)  
when:  
• The individual has tried generic octreotide first and ha d an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic octreotide 
 
Note:      A GEP -NET is a rare type of tumor that can grow in the pancreas or other 
areas of the gut, such as the stomach, small intestine, rectum, colon, or 
appendix.  
 
Bynfezia® Pen (octreotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for the treatment of adults with carcinoid syndrome  
when : 
• The individual has tried generic octreotide first and had an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic octreotide  Page | 3 of 28  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
 
Bynfezia® Pen (octreotide) may be  considered medically 
necessary  for the treatment of profuse watery diarrhea 
associated with  vasoactive intestinal peptide tumors  (VIP omas) 
in adults  when:  
• The individual has tried generic octreotide first and had an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic octreotide 
Isturisa® (osilodrostat) 
oral Isturisa® (osilodrostat) may be considered medically necessary 
for treatment of Cushing’s disease when ALL  of the following 
conditions are true:  
• Individual  has a documented diagnosis of Cushing’s disease 
established by any of the following tests:  
o 24-hour urinary free- cortisol test  
o Late-night salivary cortisol test  
o Overnight low -dose dexamethasone suppression test 
o Dexamethasone- corticotropin -releasing hormone (CRH) 
test  
AND  
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Individual  has failed pituitary surgery, or is not a surgical 
cand idate  
AND  
• Individual  has tried generic ketoconazole first and had an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic ketoconazole  
AND  
• The dose is limited to 60 mg per day (taken as 30 mg twice 
daily)  
Korlym®  (mifeprist one) 
oral Korlym ® (mifepristone) may be considered medically 
necessary for treatment of hyperglycemia in individuals with Cushing’s syndrome when the following conditions are met:  
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Individual  has type 2 diabetes mellitus or glucose intolerance 
AND  
• Hyperglycemia is secondary to Cushing’s syndrome 
AND  Page | 4 of 28  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
• Individual  has failed pituitary surgery , or is not a surgical 
cand idate  
Octreotide, generic SC/IV  Generic o ctreotide  may be considered medically necessary for 
treatment of acromegaly when the following conditions are 
met:  
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Documented diagnosis of acromegaly established by one of 
the following tests: 
o Elevated serum insulin-like growth factor -1 (IGF -1) 
o Inadequate suppression of growth hormone levels (> 1 ng/mL) two hours after oral glucose tolerance test  
AND  
• Had an inadequate response to surgery or radiation therapy or surgery and radiation therapy is not appropriate 
 Generic octreotide  may be considered medically necessary for 
the treatment of adult individuals with unresectable, locally 
advanced or metastatic gastroenteropancreatic 
neuroendocrine tumors  (GEP-NETs) . 
 
Note:      A GEP -NET is a rare type of tumor t hat can grow in the pancreas or other 
areas of the gut, such as the stomach, small intestine, rectum, colon, or 
appendix.  
 
Generic octreotide  may be considered medically necessary for 
the treatment of adults with carcinoid syndrome . 
 
Generic octreotide  may be considered medically necessary for 
the treatment of profuse watery diarrhea associated with 
vasoactive intestinal peptide tumors (VIPomas) in adults . 
Mycapssa ® (octreotide) 
oral Mycapssa® (octreotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for treatment of acromegaly when the following 
conditions are met : 
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  Page | 5 of 28  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
• Documented diagnosis of acromegaly established by one of 
the following tests: 
o Elevated serum insulin-like growth factor -1 (IGF -1) 
o Inadequate suppression of growth hormone levels (> 1 
ng/mL) two hours after oral glucose tolerance test  
AND  
• Had an inadequate response to surgery or radiation therapy or 
surgery and radiation therapy is not appropriate 
AND  
• The individual has already responded to and tolerated 
octreotide or lanreotide  
AND  
• The dose prescribed is ≤ 80 mg daily 
Recorlev ® 
(levoketoconazole) oral  Recorlev® (levoketoconazole)  may be considered medically 
necessary for treatment of endogenous hypercortisolemia  
(high cortisol) in individuals with Cushing’s syndrome when 
the following conditions are met:  
• Individual  has a documented diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome 
established by any of the following tests:  
o 24-hour urinary free- cortisol test  
o Late-night salivary cortisol test  
o Overnight low -dose dexamethasone suppression test 
o Dexamethasone- corticotropin -releasing hormone (CRH) 
test  
AND  
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Individual  has failed surgery or is not a surgical candidate  
AND  
• Individual  has tried generic ketoconazole first and had an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic ketoconazole  
AND  
• The dose prescribed is ≤ 1,200 mg daily  
Sandostatin ® (octreotide) 
SC/IV  Sandostatin® (octreotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for treatment of acromegaly when the following 
conditions are met:  
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older  Page | 6 of 28  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
AND  
• Documented diagnosis of acromegaly established by one of 
the following tests: 
o Elevated serum insulin-like growth factor -1 (IGF -1) 
o Inadequate suppression of growth hormone levels (> 1 ng/mL) two hours after oral glucose tolerance test  
AND  
• Had an inadequate response to  surgery or radiation therapy or 
surgery and radiation therapy is not appropriate 
AND  
• The individual has tried generic octreotide first and ha d an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic octreotide 
 
Sandostatin® (octreotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for the treatment of adult individuals with 
unresectable, locally advanced or metastatic gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors  (GEP-NETs)  
when:  
• The individual has tried generic octreotide first and ha d an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic octreotide 
 
Note:      A GEP -NET is a rare type of tumor that can grow in the pancreas or other 
areas of the gut, such as the stomach, small intestine, rectum, colon, or 
appendix.  
 
Sandostatin® (octreotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for the treatment of adults with carcinoid synd rome 
when : 
• The individual has tried generic octreotide first and had an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic octreotide 
 
Sandostatin® (octreotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for the treatment of profuse watery diarrhea associated  with vasoactive intestinal peptide tumors (VIPomas) 
in adults when : 
• The individual has tried generic octreotide first and had an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic octreotide  Page | 7 of 28  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
Sandostatin ® LAR Depot 
(octreotide) IM  Sandostatin® LAR Depot (octreotide)  may be considered 
medically necessary for treatment of acromegaly when the 
following conditions are met : 
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Documented diagnosis of acromegaly established by one of the following tests: 
o Elevated serum insulin-like growth factor -1 (IGF -1) 
o Inadequate suppression of growth hormone levels (> 1 
ng/mL) two hours after oral glucose tolerance test  
AND  
• Had an inadequate response to surgery or radiation therapy or 
surgery and radiation therapy is not appropriate 
 Sandostatin® LAR Depot (octreotide)  may be considered 
medically necessary for the treatment of adult individuals with 
unresectable, locally advanced or metastatic 
gastroenteropancreatic neuroe ndocrine tumors  (GEP-NETs) . 
 
Note:      A GEP -NET is a rare type of tumor that can grow in the pancreas or other 
areas of the gut, such as the stomach, small intestine, rectum, colon, or 
appendix.  
 
Sandostatin® LAR Depot (octreotide)  may be considered 
medically necessary for the treatment of adults with carcinoid syndrome . 
 
Sandostatin® LAR Depot (octreotide)  may be considered 
medically necessary for the treatment of profuse watery diarrhea associated with vasoactive intestinal peptide tumors 
(VIPomas) in adults . 
Signifor®  (pasireotide ) SC Signifor ® (pasireotide) may be considered medically necessary 
for treatment of Cushing’s disease when ALL  of the following 
conditions are true:  
• Individual  has a documented diagnosis of Cushing’s disease 
established by any of the following tests:  
o 24-hour urinary free- cortisol test  Page | 8 of 28  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
o Late-night salivary cortisol test  
o Overnight low -dose dexamethasone suppression test 
o Dexamethasone- corticotropin -releasing hormo ne (CRH) 
test  
AND  
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Individual  has failed pituitary surgery, or is not a surgical 
cand idate  
AND  
• Individual  has tried generic ketoconazole first and had an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic ketoconazole  
Signifor® LAR  
(pasireotide) IM Signifor® LAR (pasireotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for treatment of Cushing’s disease when ALL  of the  
following conditions are true:  
• Individual  has a documented diagnosis of Cushing’s disease 
established by any of the following tests:  
o 24-hour urinary free- cortisol test  
o Late-night salivary cortisol test  
o Overnight low -dose dexamethasone suppression test 
o Dexamethasone- corticotropin -releasing hormone (CRH) 
test 
AND  
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Individual  has failed pituitary surgery, or is not a surgical 
cand idate  
AND  
• Individual  has tried generic ketoconazole first and had an 
inadequate response or intolerance to generic ketoconazole  
 Signifor® LAR (pasireotide)  may be considered medically 
necessary for the treatment of acromegaly when the following 
conditions are met:  
• Individual is 18 years of age or older 
AND  Page | 9 of 28  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
• Documented diagnosis of acromegaly established by one of 
the following tests: 
o Elevated serum insulin-like growth factor -1 (IGF -1) 
o Inadequate suppression of growth hormone levels (> 1 
ng/mL) two hours after oral glucose tolerance test  
AND  
• Had an inadequate response to surgery or radiation therapy or 
surgery and radiation therapy is not appropriate  
• Brand lanreotide SC  
• Somatuline® Depot 
(lanreotide) SC  Brand lanreotide and Somatuline® Depot (lanreotide)  may be 
considered medically necessary for treatment of acromegaly 
when the following conditions are met : 
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Documented diagnosis of acromegaly established by one of 
the following tests: 
o Elevated serum insulin-like growth factor -1 (IGF -1) 
o Inadequate suppression of growth hormone levels (> 1 ng/mL) two hours after oral glucose tolerance test  
AND  
• Had an inadequate response to surgery or radiation therapy or surgery and radiation therapy is not appropriate 
 Brand lanreotide and Somatuline® Depot (lanreotide)  may be 
considered medically necessary for the treatment of adult individual s with unresectable, locally advanced or metastatic 
gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors  (GEP-NETs) . 
 
Note:      A GEP -NET is a rare type of tumor that can grow in the pancreas or other 
areas of the gut, such as the stomach, small intestine, rectum, colon, or 
appendix.  
 
Brand lanreotide and Somatuline® Depot (lanreotide)  may be 
considered medically necess ary for the treatment of adults 
with carcinoid syndrome . 
 
Brand lanreotide and Somatuline® Depot (lanreotide)  may be 
considered medically necessary  for the treatment of profuse Page | 10 of 28  ∞ Drug  Medical Necessity  
watery diarrhea associated with  vasoactive intestinal peptide 
tumors  (VIPomas) in adults.  
Somavert ® (pegvisomant) 
SC Somavert ® (pegvisomant) may be considered medically 
necessary for the treatment of acromegaly when the following 
conditions are met:  
• Individual  is 18 years of age or older 
AND  
• Documented diagnosis of acromegaly established by one of 
the following tests: 
o Elevated serum insulin-like growth factor -1 (IGF -1) 
o Inadequate suppression of growth hormone levels (> 1 ng/mL) two hours after oral glucose tolerance test  
AND  
• Had an inadequate response to surgery or radiation therapy or surgery and radiation therapy is not appropriate 
 
Drug  Investigational  
As listed  All other uses of  the medications listed  in this policy are 
considered investigational.  
 
Length of Approval  
Approval  Criteria  
Initial authorization  All drugs  listed  in policy may be approved up to  1 year . 
Re-authorization criteria  Future re -authorization of all drugs listed in policy  may be 
approved up to 1 year as long as the drug -specific coverage 
criteria are met and chart notes demonstrate that the 
individual  continues to show a positive clinical response to 
therapy.  
 
Documentation Requirements  
The individual ’s medical records submitted for review for all conditions should document 
that medical necessity criteria are met. The record should include the following:  
• Office visit notes that contain the diagnosis, relevant history, physical evaluatio n, and 
medication history  Page | 11 of 28  ∞  
Coding   
 
Code  Description  
HCPCS  
J1930 Injection, lanreotide , (Somatuline® Depot )1mg 
J2502  Injection, pasireotide  (Signifor®  LAR) long acting, 1 mg  
J2353  Injection, octreotide, depot form for intramuscular injection,  (Sandostatin® ) 1 mg  
J2354  Injection, octreotide, nondepot form for subcutaneous or intravenous 
injection,  25 mcg 
J3490  Unclassified drugs  (Use to report Lanreotide  & Signifor® ) 
J3590  Unclassified biologics  (Use to report Lanreotide  & Somavert ®) 
Note: CPT codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighted by the American Medical Association (AMA). HCPCS 
codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighted by Centers for Medicare Services (CMS).  
 
Related Information   
 
Benefit Application 
 
Pharmacy Benefit  
Isturisa® (osilodrostat), Korlym® (mifepristone), Mycapssa® (octreotide) , and Recorlev® 
(levoketoconazole) are managed through the Pharmacy benefit.  
 
Medical / Pharmacy Benefit  
Brand lanreotide, Bynfezia® Pen (octreotide) , generic octreotide, Sandostatin® (octreotide) , 
Sandostatin® LAR Depot (octreotide), Signifor® (pasireotide) , Signifor® LAR ( pasireotide), 
Somatuline® Depot (lanreotide), and Somavert® (pegvisomant)  are managed through both the 
Pharmacy benefit  and Medical benefit.  Page | 12 of 28  ∞  
Evidence Review   
 
Description 
Cushing’s syndrome is a classic constellation of symptoms caused by long -term exposure to 
excessively high levels of circulating corticosteroid hormones. The most common cause of 
Cushing’s syndrome is exogenous glucocorticoid administration. However, symptoms may result 
from endogenous causes including ACTH -dependent and ACTH -independent Cushing’s. ACTH-
dependent disease makes up 80% of endogenous cases and is due to pituitary adenoma in 85% 
of cases and ectopic tumor secretion in 15% of cases. Cushing’s disease refers to pituitary 
tumors that secrete ACTH.  
Cushing’s syndrome occurs in 1- 3 individuals/million persons yearly with a prevalence of 40 
cases/million persons, more frequently in females (3:1). Cushing’s disease occurs more rarely 
than Cushing’s syndrome and incidence peaks in the third to fourth decade.  
The pituitary produces many hormones including TSH, growth hormone, ACTH, luteinizing 
hormone, follicle stimulating hormone, prolactin, and vasopressin. Pituitary adenomas can result 
in overproduction of ACTH, resulting in excess cortisol production from the adrenal glands. The 
hypothalamic-p ituitary -adrenal (HPA) axis no longer retains its circadian rhythm and 
hypercortisolism occurs. Excess cortisol results in a wide constellation of symptoms including 
truncal obesity, hypertension, impaired glucose tolerance, dyslipidemia, increased risk of arterial 
thrombosis, psychiatric and cognitive disorders, osteoporosis, muscle and skin atrophy, impaired immune function, and hyperandrogenism. Quality of life (QOL) is frequently impaired. Morbidity 
and mortality is increased due to increased infections as well as cardiovascular disease resulting 
from increased cardiovascular risk factors such as hypertension, DM, and dyslipidemia. 
Estimated 5- year survival in untreated individuals is 50%. With treatment, chances of death 
remain 2- 4 times greater than the average population.  
 
Treatment Alternatives for Cushing’s D isease  
The preferred treatment for Cushing’s disease transsphenoidal surgery (TSS), which results in long-term remission rates of 60-90% with a recurrence risk of 26% within 10-years. Poor 
outcomes are seen with larger tumor size and repeat surgeries. Individual s with persistent 
disease after surgery can be treated with pituitary irradiation; however, months to years of Page | 13 of 28  ∞ treatment may be required before an effect is seen. Bilateral adrenalectomy may also be 
performed; however, the pituitary adenoma remains in situ, negative feedback effects of cortisol 
are lost, and replacement gluco - and mineralocorticoids are required.  
Medical therapy is used with unsuccessful surgery, individual s without an adenoma image on 
MRI,  those undergoing radiotherapy which is not yet effective, individuals with severe complications of Cushing’s, and with those ineligible for surgery. Cushing’s disease can be 
treated with drugs that target the adenoma, adrenal ACTH receptors or glucocorticoid receptors. 
Drugs which target the pituitary include the somatostatin analog , parireotide, and the dopamine 
agonist cabergoline. Cabergoline is a dopamine agonist that targets dopamine receptor subtype 
2 (D2R), which is expressed in 80% of ACTH- secreting pituitary adenomas and is useful when 
Cushing's disease is associated with urinary free cortisol (UFC) values up to twice normal . 
Adrenal -targeting drugs include ketoconazole, met yrapone, and mitotane. These agents act by 
inhibiting steroid formation. Ketoconazole’s actions are linked to inhibition of CYP 450 enzymes. 
Metyrapone decreases cortisol secretion, but usually not to normal, in individuals with Cushing's 
disease and is primarily used as adjunctive therapy in individuals with mild disease or after 
pituitary irra diation . Mifepristone is the only agent available which blocks glucocorticoid 
receptors, more specifically the cortisol and progesterone receptors. Mifepristone is FDA indicated for individuals with Cushing’s syndrome with diabetes or glucose intolerance that 
require glycemic control. 
 
Recorlev® (levoketoconazole)  
Levoketoconazole is an adrenal steroidogenesis inhibitor. It is the 2S,4R enantiomer of racemic 
ketoconazole  and is  the active enantiomer for steroidogenesis inhibition. Levoketoconazole 
inhibits enzymes involved in steroidogenesis including CYP11A1, CYP17A1, CYP11B1, and 
CYP11B2 (see Figure 2). In vitro studies indicate levoketoconazole is approximately twice as 
potent than ketoconazole in steroidogenesis inhibition. Levoketoconazole differs from 
ketoconazole in that it is 12-fold less potent than ketoconazole towards inhibition of liver enzymes. However, based on pharmacologic studies, levoketoconazole and ketoconazole 
appear to have the same effects on lipid metabolism and antifungal activity. Also, the impact of 
both drugs on CYP enzymes appears similar; therefore, drug interactions are expected to be 
similar with both drugs.  
Levoketoconazole  has been studied in two small, fair quality, Phase 3 trials (SONICS and 
LOGICS). The SONICS trial was a multicenter, single- arm, open- label, nonrandomized, Phase 3 
trial which included 94 adults with a confirmed diagnosis of endogenous CS with mUFC ≥1.5 Page | 14 of 28  ∞ times the ULN and either an abnormal dexamethasone suppression test or an abnormal late 
night salivary cortisol.1,  Those with QT prolongation, abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG), 
hepatic disease, uncontrolled hypertension, or poorly controlled DM were excluded. The trial 
included a 2-21 week dose titration phase followed by a 6 month maintenance phase, and a 6 
month extension. Individual s began levoketoconazole at 150 mg po BID which was then titrated 
to response with a max of 600 mg po BID. Those with an established therapeutic dose (defined 
as mUFC <ULN or max dose levoketoconazole with a clinically meaningful partial response) 
were eligible to continue to the maintenance phase. A total of 94 individuals began the titration phase; however, 17/94 (18%) discontinued the study, leaving 77 individuals who entered the 
maintenance phase; an additional 17% of individuals discontinued the study during the 
maintenance phase. The primary endpoint was complete response in the maintenance phase, 
defined as mUFC below the ULN during the maintenance phase without a dose change. At the 
end of the maintenance phase, levoketoconazole met the primary endpoint; 30.9% of individuals 
were considered responders (p=0.0154 vs null hypothesis of ≤20% responders). The per 
protocol analysis of the same endpoint found 45% of individuals were considered responders 
(p=0.0001). Additionally, 36.1% of individuals met criteria for mUFC normalization regardless of 
dose change and 45.7% had normal ized mUFC or ≥50% decrease in mUFC. Significant 
improvement was noted in comorbidity biomarkers for fasting blood glucose (FBG), hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein (LDL), high density lipoprotein (HDL), and 
body weight (p<0.0001 for all comparisons); however, no significant change was noted in systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), or C- reactive protein (CRP). 
Significant improvement was also occurred in clinical signs and symptoms including hirsutism in women (p=0.0008), acne (p=0.0063), and peripheral edema (p=0.03). The CushingQoL score 
significantly improved (p<0.0001) at both assessment points (3 and 6 months), exceeding the 
MID at the 6 month mark only.  The mean change in Beck Depression Inventory- II (BDI- II) score 
significantly improved at 6 months (- 4.3, p=0.0043) and exceeded the minimum important 
difference (MID). Lastly, individuals completing the maintenance phase were eligible to enter the extended phase.1 A total of 60 indivi duals entered the extension phase of the trial with 55.1% 
and 40.9% of individuals achieving mUFC ≤ULN at Month 9 and 12, respectively. Improvements in hirsutism (p<0.0001), CushingQoL (13.2, p<0.0001), and BDI- II (-5.4%, p=0.0016) were 
maintained during the extension phase; however, changes in acne and peripheral edema were no longer significant. 
The LOGICS trial was a multicenter, double- blind, placebo -controlled, randomized, Phase 3 
withdrawal trial which included 84 individuals who either completed the SONICS trial (12 
individuals) or met the SONICS inclusion criteria.2,3 Individuals entered an open-label, 14- 19 
week dose titration phase for levoketoconazole (150- 600 mg po BID). Those with a stable dose 
of levoketoconazole and  normalized mUFC for 4 weeks entered the 8- week, double- blind, Page | 15 of 28  ∞ placebo -controlled, randomized withdrawal period where individual s were randomized to 
levoketoconazole or placebo. Individual s who completed the randomized withdrawal period 
conti nued on to restoration period without a change in treatment unless rescue criteria were 
met. Rescue criteria included 1) relapse of hypercortisolemia, 2) partial loss of cortisol response 
and deterioration in ≥1 biomarker, 3) clinical deterioration and deterioration in ≥2 biomarkers 
without loss of cortisol response. The primary endpoint was the proportion of individuals with 
loss of mUFC response during the randomized withdrawal period where loss of response was 
defined as mUFC ≥1.5 times the ULN or >40% increase in mUFC above baseline. Overall, 84 
individuals entered the titration phase of the trial and 44 continued on to the withdrawal period, 
resulting in a 47% discontinuation rate. The primary outcome of loss of response during the 
withdra wal period occurred 40.9% of individuals with levoketoconazole compared to 95.5% with 
placebo (p=0.0002). At the end of the withdrawal period, 50% of individuals on 
levoketoconazole and 4.5% of individual s on placebo had normalized mUF C (p=0.0015). 
Additionally, total cholesterol and LDL significantly increased in the placebo group compared to levoketoconazole during the withdrawal phase (p=0.0004 and 0.0056, respectively). No change was seen in FBC, HbA1c or CRP. The median time to rescue for individuals randomized to 
placebo was 22 days.  
Serious AEs occurred in 15% of individuals in the SONICS trial; of these, four were considered 
probably or definitely related to treatment (increased LFTs [one individual], QT prolongation 
[two individuals], and adrenal insufficiency [one individual]). Additionally, serious adverse events 
(SAEs) occurred in 16% of individuals in the LOGICS trial; those considered drug related were hepatoxicity (three individual s), gastroenteritis (one individual), and hypokalemia (one 
individual). Common AEs in the Phase 3 trials were nausea (29%- 32%), headache (21%- 28%), 
hypokalemia (28%), peripheral edema (19%), hypertension (17%-19%), fatigue (16%), and diarrhea (15%), increased ALT (15%).1- 3 Most AEs were of mild to moderate intensity. 
 
Treatment Alternatives for Acromegaly  
The goals of therapy are to lower the serum insulin- like growth factor 1 (IGF -1), and serum 
growth hormone (GH) concentrations. For a individual who has microadenoma/macroadenoma, 
which is resectable, transsphenoidal surgery is preferred. If adenoma is not resectable (or individual is not a candidate for surgery), then the preferred treatment would be a long -acting 
somatostatin analog, such as octreotide or lanreotide. If somatostatin analog treatment with or without cabergoline is not effective, adding pegvisomant may be necessary (note this approach 
has NOT been approved by the FDA). If adenoma size keeps increasing despite the use of 
somatostatin analog with pegvisomant, radiotherapy or repeat surgery may be warranted.  Page | 16 of 28  ∞  
Signifor®  LAR (pasireotide)  
Signifor® LAR (pasireotide)  is a cyclohexapeptide somatostatin analogue. Pasireotide binds to 
and activates somatostatin receptors. This results in the inhibition of ACTH, leading to decreased 
cortisol secretion. Of the five somatostatin receptors (hsst1- 5), the somatostatin receptor hsst5 is 
overexpressed on corticotroph adenomas in individual s with Cushing’s disease. Pasireotide 
preferentially binds to hsst1,2,3,5 and has 40- fold higher affinity for hsst5 than octreotide. The 
dose of pasireotide is titrated based on response and tolerability. Treatment response is defined 
as a clinically meaningful decrease in 24- hour UFC and/or improved signs and symptoms of 
Cushing’s disease. The maximum decrease in UFC typically occurs after 2 months of therapy. If 
dose reductions are necessary due to AEs, reductions of 0.3 mg are recommended. Caution is 
recommended with drugs which prolong the QT interval. Cyclosporine levels may decrease with 
pasireotide and a dose increase of cyclosporine may be required to maintain cyclosporine levels. 
Bromocriptine levels may increase with pasireotide and a dose reduction of bromocriptine may be necessary.  
Pasireotide has been studied in a phase II and a phase III trial for Cushing’s disease. Both trials assessed changes in urinary free cortisol (UFC) level, a biomarker, rather than clinical symptoms 
of Cushing’s disease. The phase III trial randomized 162 individuals to pasireotide 600 mcg or 900 mcg subcutaneously twice daily for 6 months. No comparator arm was included. Pasireotide 
was considered efficacious based on the predefined study efficacy criteria of >15% responder 
rate which was achieved with both doses of pasireotide (15% 600 mcg, 26% 900 mcg); however, 
the study was not powered to compare study arms. Changes in clinical symptoms of Cushing’s 
disease were considered secondary endpoints. Significant changes were noted in weight ( -6.7 
kg, p<0.001) as well as systolic ( -6 mm Hg, p=0.03) and diastolic blood pressure ( -3.7 mm Hg, 
p=0.03). However, changes in antihypertensive medications were allowed during the trial and may have influenced the latter results. Lastly, the open- label, 15- day, phase II trial in 29 
individuals found 17% of individuals normalized UFC with pasireotide 600 mcg. None of the 
pasireotide trials were of long enough duration to assess changes in mortality. Trial sizes are 
small due to the limited number of individuals with Cushing’s disease. Lastly, none of the trials 
included a comparator arm. Use of a placebo arm was considered unethical and, at the time of trial design, no other medications were FDA approved for Cushing’s. Since that time, 
mifepristone (Korlym) has received approval for the control of hyperglycemia due to 
hypercortisolism in indiv iduals with Cushing’s syndrome with diabetes mellitus (DM) or glucose 
intolerance that failed or are not eligible for surgery.  Page | 17 of 28  ∞ Pasireotide (Signifor® LAR) in the setting of acromegaly was approved based on two 
multicenter Phase III studies, C2305 and C2402, which respectively examined medically naïve 
individuals, who have had prior surgery, or for whom surgery was not an option, and individuals 
with acromegaly inadequately controlled on first generation somatostatin analogs. In both 
studies, higher rates of full biochemical control (defined as mean GH level <2.5mcg/L and 
normal IGF -1 levels) were achieved with Signifor LAR compared to a first generation 
somatostatin analog. A crossover extension to C2305 showed 17.3% (14/81) of individua ls that 
did not reach biochemical control (GH still ≥ 2.5 mcg/L and IGF -1 still above normal) were able 
to achieve control of both GH and IGF- 1 after switching to pasireotide. Zero out of thirty-eight 
individuals switching to octreotide achieved control. Pasireotide individuals had more hyperglycemic adverse effects (27.2% vs. 13.2%)  
A 12 month, multicenter, double-blind RCT superiority study (n=358) determined that 
pasireotide was superior to octreotide in acromegaly individuals. Individual s studied were 
medically naïve. Individual s could have had a prior pituitary surgery, or otherwise refused 
surgery or had surgery contraindicated. The primary outcome was growth hormone falling 
under 2.5 μg/L as well as normal IGF -1 at month 12. Significantly more pasireotide LAR 
individuals achieved control than octreotide LAR individuals (31.3% vs 19.2%, p value = 0.007). 
Pasireotide individual s had a significantly higher rate of hyperglycemia (57.3% vs. 21.7). 
Acromegaly guidelines available at this time do not recommend pasireotide as a first line option 
due to a shorter history of efficacy and safety vs. other somatostatin analogs.  
An open- label, multicenter, single-arm, expanded -treatment study (2017) evaluated the safety 
profile of Signifor® LAR administered intramuscularly every 28 days in 44 adult individuals with 
active acromegaly for an average of 37.6 weeks. There were 25 grade ≥ 3 treatment -emergent 
adverse events reported in 11 individual s (25%), with 27.3% of those experiencing grade ≥ 3 
hyperglycemia. There were 21 individual s (48%) who needed to initiate antidiabetic medications. 
Overall, hyperglycemia -related adverse events were most common, but they were generally 
manageable. 
 
Somavert ® (pegvisomant ) 
Somavert selectively binds to growth hormone (GH) receptors on cell surfaces, where it blocks 
the binding of endogenous GH, and thus interferes with GH signal transduction. Inhibition of GH 
action results in decreased serum concentrations of insulin- like growth factor -I (IGF -I), as well as 
other GH- responsive serum proteins, including IGF binding protein- 3 (IGFBP- 3), and the acid-
labile subunit (ALS).  Page | 18 of 28  ∞ Somavert has been studied in a randomized, double- blinded, placebo -controlled, 12- week study 
evaluating the safety and efficacy of Somavert 10 mg, 15 mg, or 20 mg in individuals with 
acromegaly. Following withdrawal from previous medical therapy, the 80 individuals randomized 
to treatment with Somavert received a subcutaneous (SC) loading dose, followed by 10, 15, or 20 mg/day SC. The three groups that received Somavert showed dose-dependent reductions in 
serum levels of IGF -I, free IGF -I, IGFBP -3, and ALS compared with placebo at all post -baseline 
visits. After 12 weeks of treatment, the mean serum IGF -I concentration decreased from baseline 
by 4.0%, 26.7%, 50.1%, and 62.5% in the placebo, 10 mg, 15 mg, and 20 mg arms, respectively. This difference was significant in all treatment arms compared to placebo. Normalization of 
serum IGF -I concentrations were achieved in 10%, 54%, 81%, and 89% of subjects in the 
placebo, 10 mg, 15 mg, and 20 mg arms, respectively. In individuals treated with Somavert 15 mg or 20 mg daily, there were significant decreases in ring size, soft- tissue swelling, the degree 
of excessive perspiration, and fatigue.  
Somavert is contraindicated in individual s with a history of hypersensitivity to any of its 
components.  
 
Korlym® (mifepristone)  
Korlym® (mifepristone)  is a glucocorticoid receptor- II (GR -II) antagonist that has high affinity for 
the GR -II receptor but little affinity for the GR -I (mineralocorticoid) receptor. It also blocks 
progesterone receptors. There appears to be little or no affinity for estrogen, muscarinic, 
histaminic, or monoamine receptors. The approval of mifepristone for the treatment of 
hyperglycemia due to hypercortisolism secondary to Cushing’s syndrome was primarily based 
on results from one 24 week, phase III, multicenter, open- label, single arm study (Study of the 
Efficacy and Safety of Mifepristone in the treatment of Endogenous Cushing’s Syndrome [SEISMIC]). Results showed significant clinical, metabolic, and health- related quality of life 
improvements in 50 individual s, the majority of whom had failed multiple therapeutic 
modalities. While the strength of evidence of efficacy is weak, the authors and FDA approval suggests benefits outweigh risks for this orphan indication with unmet need. An extension study 
for SEISMIC participants examining long -term safety and efficacy is ongoing. Numerous case 
reports and small retrospective studies of mifepristone use for hypercortisolism are also available in the literature. The majority of individuals in these reports had failed multiple therapeutic modalities, including surgery, prior to use of mifepristone. Doses of the agent 
ranged from 200 to 2000 mg/day for up to 2 years. Most publications reported improvements in 
the clinical manifestations of the condition. Mifepristone has a large potential for drug -drug Page | 19 of 28  ∞ interactions via the CYP3A4, CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 pathways. Its efficacy data remains limited, 
and long -term data is unavailable. 
 
Summary  
Interpretation of available data on the efficacy and safety of most drugs currently used in the 
treatment of Cushing’s disease is difficult. Published study designs have varied considerably with 
only a few small prospective, randomized, controlled studies available. Furthermore, there is 
significant variation in clinical outcomes or biochemical parameters used as the primary endpoint ( e.g., urine free cortisol [UFC], serum and salivary cortisol, and plasma ACTH), and 
reference values derived from a sufficiently large population are largely lacking, especially for some of the more recently developed assays. Unfortunately, criteria for defining a clear and 
effective response to treatment, and for disease control, are insufficient at this time.  
 
Sandostatin® LAR Depot (octreotide)  
Octreotide exerts pharmacologic actions similar to the natural hormone, somatostatin. It is an 
even more potent inhibitor of growth hormone, glucagon, and insulin than somatostatin. For the 
treatment of acromegaly, the clinical trials of Sandostatin® LAR Depot were performed in 
individuals who had been receiving octreotide  injection for a period of weeks to as long as 10 
years. The acromegaly studies with Sandostatin® LAR Depot  were performed in individual s who 
achieved GH  levels of < 10 ng/mL (and, in most cases < 5 ng/mL) while on subcutaneous 
octreotide  inject ion. However, some individuals enrolled were partial responders to 
subcutaneous octreotide  injection, i.e. , GH levels were reduced by > 50% on subcutaneous 
octreotide  injection compared to the untreated state, although not suppressed to < 5 ng/mL.  
Sandostatin® LAR Depot  was evaluated in three clinical trials in acromegalic individuals.  In 2 of 
the clinical trials, a total of 101 individual s were entered who had, in most cases, achieved a GH  
level < 5 ng/mL on octreotide  injection given in doses of 100 mcg or 200 mcg three times daily. 
Most  individuals were switched to 20 mg or 30 mg doses of Sandostatin® LAR Depot  given 
once every 4 weeks for up to 27 to 28 injections. A few individual s received doses of 10 mg and 
a few required doses of 40 mg. Growth hormone and IGF -1 levels were at least as well 
controlled with Sandostatin® LAR Depot  as they had been on octreotide  injection and this level 
of control remained for the entire duration of the trials.  
A third tri al was a 12 -month study that enrolled 151 individuals who had a GH level < 10 ng/mL 
after treatment with octreotide  injection (most had levels < 5 ng/mL). The starting dose of Page | 20 of 28  ∞ Sandostatin® LAR Depot  was 20 mg every 4 weeks for 3 doses. Thereafter, individuals received 
10 mg, 20 mg, or 30 mg every 4 weeks, depending upon the degree of GH suppression. GH and 
IGF-1 were at least as well controlled on Sandostatin® LAR Depot  as they had been on 
octreotide  injection.  
For the 88 individuals who received 27 to 28 injections in the first two trials,  a mean GH level of 
< 2.5 ng/mL was observed in 47% receiving Sandostatin® LAR Depot . Over the course of the 
trials, 42% of individuals maintained mean growth hormone levels of < 2.5 ng/mL and mean 
normal IGF -1 levels. 
For the 122 individual s who received all 12 injections in the third trial, a mean GH level of <  2.5 
ng/mL was observed in 66% receiving Sandostatin® LAR Depot . Over the course of the trial, 
57% of individuals maintained mean growth hormone levels of < 2.5 ng/mL and mean normal 
IGF-1 levels. 
In all 3 trials, GH, IGF -1, and clinical symptoms were similarly controlled on Sandostatin® LAR 
Depot  as they had been on octreotide  injection.  Of the 25 individuals who completed the trials 
and were partial responders to octreotide  injection (GH > 5.0 ng/mL but reduced by > 50% 
relative to untreated levels), 1 individual  (4%) responded to  Sandostatin® LAR Depot  with a 
reduction of GH to < 2.5 ng/mL and 8 individuals (32%) responded  with a reduction of GH to < 
5.0 ng/mL. 
 
Somatuline® Depot (lanreotide)  
Lanreotide is an octapeptide analog of natural somatostatin. The mechanism of action of 
lanreotide is believed to be similar to that of natural somatostatin. Lanreotide has a high affinity 
for human somatostatin receptors (SSTR) 2 and 5 and a reduced binding affinity for human SSTR1, 3, and 4. Activity at human SSTR2 and 5 is the primary mechanism believed responsible 
for GH inhibition. Like somatostatin, lanreotide is an inhibitor of various endocrine, 
neuroendocrine, exocrine, and paracrine functions.  
The effect of Somatuline® Depot  on reducing GH and IGF -levels and control of symptoms in 
individuals with acromegaly was studied in 2 long -term, multi ple-dose, randomized, multicenter 
studies.  
Study 1 was a 1 -year study that included a 4- week, double- blind, placebo -controlled phase; a 
16-week single- blind, fixed -dose phase; and a 32- week, open- label, dose- titration phase. 
Individual s with active acromegaly, based on biochemical tests and medical history, entered a Page | 21 of 28  ∞ 12-week washout period if there was previous treatment with a somatostatin analog or a 
dopaminergic agonist.  
Upon entry, individuals were randomly allocated to receive a single, deep subcutaneous 
injection of Somatuline® Depot  60, 90, or 120 mg or placebo. Four weeks later, individuals 
entered a fixed -dose phase where they received 4 injections of Somatuline® Depot  followed by 
a dose -titration phase of 8 injections for a total of 13 injections over 52 weeks (including the 
placebo phase). Injections were given at 4-week intervals. During the dose- titration phase of the 
study, the dose was titrated twice (every fourth injection), as needed, according to individual GH 
and IGF -1 levels. 
A total of 108 individuals (51 males, 57 females) were enrolled in the initial placebo -controlled 
phase of the study. Half (54/108) of the individuals had never been treated with a somatostatin analog or dopamine agonist, or had stopped treatment for at least 3 months prior to their participation in the study and were required to have a mean GH level greater than 5 ng/mL at 
their first visit. The other half of the individual s had received prior treatment with a somatostatin 
analog or a dopamine agonist before study entry and at study entry were required to have a mean GH concentration greater than 3 ng/mL and at least a 100% increase in mean GH 
concentration after washout of medication. 
In the double- blind phase of Study 1, a total of 52 (63%) of the 83 lanreotide- treated individuals 
had a greater than 50% decrease in mean GH from baseline to Week 4, including 52%, 44%, and 
90% of  individuals in the 60, 90, and 120 mg groups, respectively, compared to placebo (0%, 
0/25). In the fixed -dose  
phase at Week 16, 72% of all 107 lanreotide- treated individuals had a decrease from baseline in 
mean GH of greater than 50%, including 68% (23/34), 64% (23/36), and 84% (31/37) of 
individuals in the 60, 90,  and 1 20 mg lanreotide treatment groups, respectively. Efficacy achieved 
in the first 16 weeks was  maintained for the duration of the study.  
Study 2 was a 48- week, open- label, uncontrolled, multicenter study that enrolled individuals 
who had an IGF-1 conc entration 1.3 times or greater than the upper limit of the normal age-
adjusted range. Individual s receiving treatment with a somatostatin analog (other than 
Somatuline® Depot ) or a dopaminergic  agonist had to attain this IGF -1 concentration after a 
washout period of up to 3 months. 
Individual s were initially enrolled in a 4- month, fixed -dose phase where they received 4 deep 
subcutaneous injections of Somatuline® Depot  90 mg, at 4-week intervals. Individual s then 
entered a  dose -titration phase where the dose of Somatuline® Depot  was adjusted based on 
GH and IGF -1 levels at the beginning of the dose- titration phase and, if necessary, again after Page | 22 of 28  ∞ another 4 injections. Individual s titrated up to the maximum dose (120 mg) were not allowed to 
titrate down again.  
After 48 weeks of treatment with Somatuline® Depot  at 4-week intervals, 43% (27/63) of the 
acromegalic individuals in this study achieved normal age- adjusted IGF -1 concentrations. Mean 
IGF-1 concentrations after treatment completion were 1.3 ± 0.7 times the upper limit of normal 
compared to 2.5 ± 1.1 times the upper limit of normal at baseline. 
The reduction in IGF -1 concentrations over time correlated with a corresponding marked 
decrease in mean GH concentrations. The proportion of individuals with mean GH 
concentrations less than 2.5 ng/mL increased significantly from 35% to 77% after the fixed -dose 
phase and 85% at the end of the study. At  the end of treatment, 24/63 (38%) of individual s had 
both normal IGF -1 concentrations and a GH  concentration of less than or equal to 2.5 ng/mL 
and 17/63 individuals (27%) had both normal  IGF-1 concentrations and a GH concentration of 
less than 1 ng/mL.  
 
2014 Update  
Updated per literature search from July 1, 2013, through October 31, 2014. No changes 
required.  
 
2015 Update  
Updated per the package insert on June 2, 2015. Purpose of the update is to include a recently added indication (12/14) for the use of pasireotide (Signifor® LAR) in the setting  of acromegaly.  
 
2016 Update  
Updated the rationale section for pasireotide and mifepristone per the literature search 
conducted from July 1, 2016, through December 7, 2016. No policy criteria changes were made with this review. References updated. 
 Page | 23 of 28  ∞ 2017 Up date 
A literature search was conducted from December 1, 2016 through November 2, 2017. No policy 
criteria changes were made with this review. References updated. 
 
2018 Update  
A literature search was conducted from November 1, 2017 through October 31, 2018.  No policy 
criteria changes were made with this review. References updated.  
2019 Update  
A literature search was conducted from November 1, 2018 through August 28, 2019. Reviewed 
all FDA -approved indications for drugs in policy and made additional updates to Signifor® LAR 
(pasireotide)  to clarify Signifor® LAR is indicated for both acromegaly and Cushing’s disease. 
Policy criteria rewritten and revised  for Korlym® (mifepristone)  to reflect prescribing 
information. Added policy criteria for Somavert ® (pegvisomant). References updated. 
 
2020 Update  
Reviewed prescribing information for all drugs in policy and conducted a literature search from 
November 1, 2019 through November 30, 2020. No new information was identified and policy 
statements remain unchanged. 
 
2021 Update  
Added coverage criteria for the octreotide products ( Bynfezia ® Pen, generic octreotide, 
Mycapssa®, Sandostatin ®, and Sandostatin ® LAR Depot ) for the treatment of acromegaly. 
Included coverage for adults with  gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP -NETs) , 
carcinoid syndrome, and the treatment of profuse watery diarrhea associated with VIPomas. 
Added coverage criteria for Somatuline® Depot (lanreotide) for the treatment of acromegaly, 
GEP-NETs, carcinoid syndrome, and the treatment of profuse watery diarrhea associated with 
VIPomas. Reviewed prescribing information for Korlym® (mifepristone) , Signifor® (pasireotide), 
Signifor® LAR (pasireotide), and Somavert® (pegvisomant)  and conducted a literature sea rch Page | 24 of 28  ∞ on the management of Cushing’s disease. No new information was identified and policy 
statements remain unchanged  for management of Cushing’s disease.  
 
2022 Update  
Reviewed prescribing information for all drugs in policy and the medical management of 
Cushing’s syndrome. Updated references and added Recorlev® (levoketoconazole)  clinical trial 
information. Added coverage criteria for Recorlev® (levoketoconazole) for treatment of 
endogenous hypercortisolemia (high cortisol) in individuals with Cushing’s syndrome. Updated 
criteria for Isturisa ® (osilodrostat), Signifor ® (pasireotide), and Signifor® LAR (pasireotide) for 
the treatment of Cushing’s disease to require the individual has tried generic ketoconazole first 
and had an inadequate response or intolerance to generic ketoconazole. The requirement to use 
cabergoline AND Metopirone (metyrapone) or Lysodren (mitotane) was removed. Added a note 
on definition of a gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (GEP -NET). 
 
References   
 
1. Van der Pas R, de Herder WW, Hofland LJ, Feelders RA. Recent developments in drug therapy for Cushing’s disease. Drugs 2013 
June 5 [Epub ahead of print].  
2. Castinetti F, Moragne I, Conte -Devolx B, and Brue T. Cushing’s disease. Orpahnet J Rare Dis 2012;7:41 -50. 
3. Hammer GD, Tyrell JB, Lamborn KR, et al. Transsphenoidal microsurgery for Cushing’s disease: initial outcome and long -term 
results. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004;89(12):6348-6357. 
4. Dekkers OM, Biermasz NR, Pereira AM, et al. Mortality in patients treated  for Cushing’s disease is increased, compared with 
patients treated for nonfunctioning pituitary macroadenoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92(3):976 -981. 
5. Fleseriu M, Petersenn S. Medical management of Cushing’s disease: what is the future?  Pituitary 2012;15:330-341.  
6. Niemann LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al. The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guidel ine. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:1526- 1540.  
7. Biller BM, Grossman AB, Stewart PM, et al. Treatment of adrenocorticot ropin- dependent Cushing’s syndrome: a consensus 
statement. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:2454- 2462. 
8. FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA limits usage of Nizoral (ketoconazole) oral tablets due to potentially fatal liver injury and risk of drug interactions  and adrenal gland problems. FDA Safety Announcement dated 7/26/13. Available at:  
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm362415.htm . Accessed April 8, 2022. 
9. Colao A, Petersenn S, Newell -Price J, et al. A 12 -month phase 3 study of pasireotide in Cushing’s disease. N Engl J Med 
2012;366:914- 924. 
10. Boscaro M, Ludlam WH, Atkinson B, et al. Treatment of pituitary -dependent Cushing’s disease with the multireceptor ligand 
somatostatin analog pasireotide (SOM230): a multicenter, phase II trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009;94:115 -122. Page | 25 of 28  ∞ 11. Feelders RA, de Bruin C, Pereira AM, et al. Pasireotide alone or with cabergoline and ketoconazole in Cushing’s disease. N Engl J 
Med 2 010;362(19):1846- 1847.  
12. Biller BMK, et al. Treatment of adrenocorticotropin -dependent Cushing’s syndrome: a consensus statement. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2008; 93(7):2454– 2462.  
13. Fleseriu M, et al; SEISMIC Study Investigators. Mifepristone, a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist, produces clinical and metabolic benefits in patients with Cushing’s syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012;97:2039 -2049.  
14. Blasey CM, et al. A multisite trial of mifepristone for the treatment of psychotic depression: a site -by-treatment i nteraction. 
Contemp Clin Trial 2009;284-288.  
15. Blasey CM, et al. Efficacy and safety of mifepristone for the treatment of psychotic depression. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2011;31:436- 440. 
16. Patil CG, et al. Late recurrences of Cushing’s disease after initial successful transsphenoidal surgery. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008; 93(2):358– 362. 
17. Colao A, et al. Pasireotide versus octreotide in acromegaly: a head -to-head superiority study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014; 
99(3):791-9 
18. Katznelson L, et al. Acromegaly: an endocr ine society clinical practice guideline. J Endocrinol Metab. 2014; 99(11): 3933 -3951 
19. Bronstein MD, et al. Switching patients with acromegaly from octreotide to pasireotide improves biochemical control: crossove r 
extension to a randomized, double -blind, pha se III study. BMC Endocr Disord. 2016: 16(16). doi: 10.1186/s12902- 016-0096-8 
20. Wildemberg LE and Gadelha MR. Pasireotide for the treatment of acromegaly. Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy. 2016. 4:579-588  
21. Fleseriu M, Rusch E, Geer EB, et al. Safety and tolerability of pasireotide long- acting release in acromegaly -results from the 
acromegaly, open -label, multicenter, safety monitoring program for treating patients who have a need to receive medical 
therapy (ACCESS) study. Endocrine. 2017;55(1):247 -55. 
22. Muhamma d A, van der Lely AJ, Delhanty PJD,  et al. Efficacy and Safety of Switching to Pasireotide in Patients With Acromegaly 
Controlled With Pegvisomant and First- Generation Somatostatin Analogues (PAPE Study).  J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018 Feb 
1;103(2):586- 595. 
23. Lacroix A, Gu F, Gallardo W, Pivonello R, , et al. Efficacy and safety of once- monthly pasireotide in Cushing's disease: a 12 month 
clinical trial.  Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2018 Jan;6(1):17 -26. doi: 10.1016/S2213- 8587(17)30326- 1. Epub 2017 Oct 12.  
24. Lynnette N , Beverly B, James F, M Hassan M,  et al. Treatment of Cushing's Syndrome: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice 
Guideline .  J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Aug;100(8):2807- 31.  doi: 10.1210/jc.2015- 1818.  Epub 2015 Jul 29.  
25. Fleseriu M, Pivonello R, Elenkova A, et al. Efficacy and safety of levoketoconazole in the treatment of endogenous Cushing’s syndrome (SONICS): a phase 3, multicentre, open -label, single -arm trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2019;7(11):855 -865. 
26. Zacharieva S, Pivonello R, Elenkova A, et al. Safety and efficacy of levoketoconazole in the treatment of endogenous Cushing’s syndrome (LOGICS): results from a double -blind, placebo -controlled, randomized withdrawal study. J Endocrine Soc. 
2021;5(Supple_1):A526.  
27. Geer EB, Salvatori R, Elenkova A, et al. Levoketoconazole improves clinical signs and symptoms and patient -reported outcomes 
in patients with Cushing’s syndrome. Pituitary. 2021;24:104 -115. 
28. Pivonello R, Ferrigno R, De Martino MC, et al. Medical treatment of Cushing’s disease: an overview of the current and recent clinical trials. Front Endocrinol. 2020;11:648.  
29. Nieman L, Lacroix A, Martin K. Medical therapy of hypercortisolism (Cushing's syndrome) . UpToDate: topic last updated April 6, 
2021. Available at: https://www.uptodate.com/contents/medical-therapy- of-hypercortisolism -cushings- syndrome . 
Accessed April 8, 2022.  
30. Korlym® (mifepristone) pres cribing information. Corcept Therapeutics; Menlo Park, CA. Revised November 2019.  Page | 26 of 28  ∞ 31. Signifor® (pasireotide) injection prescribing information. Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; East Hanover, NJ. Revised 
January 2020.  
32. Signifor® LAR (pasireotide) injection prescribing information. Recordati Rare Diseases Inc; Lebanon, NJ. Revised June 2020.  
33. Somavert® (pegvisomant) prescribing information. Pfizer Inc; New York, NY. Revised August 2021. 
34. Bynfezia® Pen (octreotide  acetate ) prescribing information. Sun Pharmaceu ticals Industries, Inc. ; Cranbury, N J. Updated January  
2020. 
35. Mycapssa® (octreotide) prescribing information. MW Encap Ltd., Scotland, UK . Revised  June 2020. 
36. Sandostatin® (octreotide acetate) prescribing information. Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation.; East Hanover , NJ. Revised  
May 2021. 
37. Sandostatin®  LAR Depot  (octreotide acetate) prescribing information. Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation.; East Hanover, NJ. 
Revised  March  2021. 
38. Somatuline® Depot (lanreotide) prescribing information. Ipsen Biopharmaceuticals , Inc.; Cambridge , MA. Updated June 2019. 
39. Recorlev® (levoketoconazole)  prescribing information. Xeris Pharmaceuticals , Inc.; C hicago , IL. Revised  December  2021. 
 
History   
 
Date  Comments  
10/14/13  New policy. Add to Prescription Drug section. Pasireotide (Signifor) ® and mifepristone 
(Korlym)®  considered medically necessary to treat Cushing’s disease when criteria are 
met. 
12/17/14  Annual Review. Policy updated with literature review; no change in policy statement.  
06/09/15  Annual Review. Policy scope expanded to address acromegaly; title expanded to 
include acromegaly. Medically necessary policy statement added for acromegaly with 
criteria of inadequate response to surgery and/or not a surgical candidate.  
01/19/16  Coding update. New HCPCS code J2502, effective 1/1/16, added to policy.  
01/01/17  Annual Review, approved December 13, 2016. Policy updated with literature review.  
12/01 /17 Annual Review, approved November 21 , 2017. Policy was updated with literature 
review. Reference added. No policy changes were made.  
12/01 /18 Annual Review, approved November 21 , 2018. No changes; references update.  
10/01 /19 Annual  Review, approved September 10 , 2019. Criteria updated for  Korlym 
(mifepristone), Signifor (pasireotide) and Signifor LAR (pasireotide). New policy criteria 
added for Somavert® (pegvisomant).  
08/01/20  Interim Review, approved July 14, 2020. Added coverage criteria for Isturisa 
(osilodrostat) for the treatment of Cushing’s disease.  
01/01/21  Annual Review, approved December 17 , 2020.  No changes to policy statements.  Page | 27 of 28  ∞ Date  Comments  
05/01 /21 Annual Review, approved April 13 , 2021.  Added coverage criteria for Bynfezia Pen 
(octreotide) , generic octreotide , Sandostatin (octreotide) , and Sandostatin LAR Depot 
(octreotide)  for the treatment of acromegaly,  gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine 
tumors (GEP -NETs) , carcinoid syndrome , and treatment of the profuse watery diarrhea 
associated with VIP omas . Added coverage criteria for Mycapssa (octreotide)  for the 
treatment of acromegaly. Added coverage criteria for Somatuline Depot (lanreotide)  
for the treatment of acromegaly, GEP -NETs , carcinoid syndrome , and treatment of the 
profuse watery diarrhea associated with VIPomas . Updated coverage criteria for 
Signifor LAR (pasireotide) and Somavert (pegvisomant)  for the treatment of 
acromegaly adding requirements for patient age and documented diagnosis of 
acromegaly.  Coverage for Bynfezia® Pen (octreotide), generic octreotide, 
Sandostatin® (octreotide), Sandostatin® LAR Depot (octreotide), and Somatuline® 
Depot (lanreotide) becomes effective for dates of service on or after August 6, 2021, 
following 90 -day provider notification.  Added HCPCS codes J2353, J2354, J3490, J3590, 
J1930.  
09/01 /21 Interim Review, approved August 24 , 2021.  Updated Korlym (mifepristone)  criteria to 
state Cushing's syndrome . 
05/01 /22 Annual Review, approved April 12 , 2022.  Added coverage criteria for Recorlev 
(levoketoconazole) for treatment of endogenous hypercortisolemia (high cortisol) in patients with Cushing’s syndrome . Updated criteria for Isturisa (osilodrostat) , Signifor 
(pasireotide), and Signifor LAR (pasireotide) for the treatment of Cushing’s disease to 
require the p atient has tried generic ketoconazole first and had an inadequate 
response or intolerance to generic ketoconazole. The requirement to use cabergoline 
AND Metopirone (metyrapone) or Lysodren (mitotane) was removed. Added a note on definition of a gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumor  (GEP-NET).  
02/01 /23 Interim  Review, approved January 23 , 2023.  Added brand lanreotide to policy with the 
identical coverage criteria as Somatuline Depot (lanreotide) . Changed the wording 
from "patient" to "individual" throughout the policy for standardization.  Added 
Lanreotide to HCPC code J3490 and J3590. 
 
Disclaimer : This medical policy is a guide in evaluating the medical necessity of a particular service or treatment. The 
Company adopts policies after careful review of published peer -reviewed scientific literature, national guidelines and 
local standards of practice. Since medical technology is constantly changing, the Company reserves the right to review 
and update policies as appropriate. Member contracts differ in their benefits. Always consult the member benefit 
booklet or contact a member service representative to determine coverage for a specific medical service or supply. 
CPT codes, descriptions and materials are copyrighted by the American Medical Association (AMA). © 2023  Premera 
All Rights Reserved.  
Scope : Medical policies are systematically developed guidelines that serve as a resource for Company staff when 
determining coverage for specific medical procedures, drugs or devices. Coverage for medical services is subject to the limits and conditions of the member benefit plan. Members and their providers should consult the member Page | 28 of 28  ∞ benefit booklet or contact a customer service representative to determine whether there are any benefit limitations 
applicable to this service or supply. This medical policy does not apply to Medicare Advantage.  
 Premera Blue Cross is a n independent licensee of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association  serving businesses and residents of Alaska and Washington State, excluding C lark County.   
052493  (07-01-2021) Discrimination is Against the Law  
Premera Blue Cross  (Premera) complies with applicable Federal and Washington state civil rights laws and does not discriminate on the basis of race, 
color, national o rigin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation . Premera does not exclude people or treat them differently because of race, 
color, national origin, age, disability , sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation.  Premera  provides free aids and services to people with disabilities to 
communica te effectively with us, such as q ualified sign language interpreters  and w ritten information in other formats (large print, audio, accessible 
electronic formats, other formats) . Premera p rovides fre e language services to people whose primary language is not English, such as  qualified interpreters  
and i nformation written in other languages . If you need these services, contact the Civil Rights Coordinator.  If you believe that Premera has failed to 
provide these services or discriminated in another way on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation , 
you can file a grievance with:  Civil Rights Coordinator ─ Complaints and Appeals , PO Box 91102 , Seattle, WA 98111 , Toll free : 855-332-4535 , Fax: 425-918-5592 , 
TTY: 711 , Email  AppealsDepartmentInquiries@Premera.com . You can file a grievance in person or by mail, fax, or email.  If you need help filing a 
grievance, the Civil Rights Coordinator is available to help you.  You can also file a civil rights complaint with the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office for Civil Rights, electronically through the Office for Civil Righ ts Complaint Portal, available at  https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/portal/lobby.jsf , 
or by mail or phone at:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,  200 Independence Ave SW, Room 509F, HHH B uilding , Washington, D.C. 20201, 
1-800-368-1019,  800-537-7697 (TDD). Complaint forms are available at  http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/office/file/index.html .  
Washington  residents : You can also file a civil rights complaint wi th the Washington State Office of the Insurance Commissioner, electronically through 
the Office of the Insurance Commissioner Complaint Portal available at https://www.insurance.wa.gov/file -complaint -or-check -your-complaint -status , or by 
phone at 800 -562-6900, 360 -586-0241 (TDD). Complaint forms are available at https: //fortress.wa.gov/oic/onlineservices/cc/pub/complaintinformation.aspx .  
Alaska  residents : Contact the Alaska Division of Insurance via email at insurance@alaska.gov , or by phone at 907-269-7900 or 1 -800-INSURAK  (in-state, 
outside Anchorage) . 
Language Assistance  
ATENCIÓN : si habla español, tiene a su disposición servicios gratuitos de asistencia lingüística. Llame al 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
PAUNAWA : Kung nagsasalita ka ng Tagalog , maaari kang gumamit ng mga serbisyo ng tulong sa wika nang walang bayad. Tumawag sa  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
注意：如果您使用繁體中文，您可以免費獲得語言援助服務。請致電  800-722-1471  (TTY：711）。 
CHÚ Ý : Nếu bạn nói Tiếng Việt, có các dịch vụ hỗ trợ ngôn ngữ miễn phí dành cho b ạn.  Gọi số 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711). 
주의: 한국어를  사용하시는  경우, 언어 지원 서비스를  무료로  이용하실  수 있습니다 . 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711)  번으로  전화해  주십시오 . 
ВНИМАНИЕ : Если вы говорите на русском языке, то вам доступны бесплатные услуги перевода.  Звоните  800-722-1471  (телетайп: 711). 
LUS CEEV : Yog tias koj hais lus Hmoob , cov kev pab txog lus, muaj  kev pab dawb  rau koj. Hu rau 800-722-1471  (TTY:  711).  
MO LOU SILAFIA : Afai e te tautala  Gagana fa'a Sāmoa, o loo iai auaunaga  fesoasoan, e fai fua e leai se totogi, mo oe,  Telefoni mai:  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ໂປດຊາບ: ຖ້າວ່າ ທ່ານເວ ້າພາສາ ລາວ, ການບໍລິການຊ່ວຍເຫ  ຼື ອດ້ານພາສາ, ໂດຍບໍ່ເສ ັ ຽຄ່າ, ແມ່ນມ ີພ້ອມໃຫ້ທ່ານ. ໂທຣ 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711) . 
注意事項 ：日本語を話される場合、無料の言語支援をご利用いただけます。 800-722-1471  （TTY:711）まで、お電話にてご連絡ください。  
PAKDAAR : Nu saritaem ti Ilocano, ti serbisyo para ti baddang ti lengguahe nga awanan bayadna, ket sidadaan para kenyam.  Awagan ti  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
УВАГА!  Якщо ви розмовляєте українською мовою, ви можете звернутися до безкоштовної служби мовної підтримки.  Тел ефонуйте за 
номером 800 -722-1471  (телетайп:  711). 
ប្រយ័ត្ន៖   បរើសិនជាអ្នកនិយាយ  ភាសាខ្មែរ , បសវាជំនួយខ្ននកភាសា បោយមិនគិត្ឈ្ ន ួល គឺអាចមានសំរារ់រំបរ ើ អ្នក។  ចូរ ទូរស័ព្ទ   800-722-1471 ( TTY: 711)។ 
ማስታወሻ :  የሚናገሩት  ቋንቋ ኣማርኛ  ከሆነ የትርጉም  እርዳታ ድርጅቶች፣  በነጻ ሊያግዝዎት  ተዘጋጀተዋል፡  ወደ ሚከተለው  ቁጥር ይደውሉ  800-722-1471 (መስማት  ለተሳናቸው : 711). 
XIYYEEFFANNAA : Afaan  dubbattu  Oroomiffa , tajaajila  gargaarsa  afaanii , kanfaltiidhaan  ala, ni argama . Bilbilaa  800-722-1471 ( TTY: 711).  
ملحوظة:  إذا كنت تتحدث اذكر اللغة، فإن خدمات المساعدة اللغوية تتوافر لك بالمجان.  اتصل برقم   1471-722-800    :(رقم هاتف الصم والبكم711 .) 
ਧਿਆਨ  ਧਿਓ: ਜੇ ਤੁਸੀਂ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ  ਬੋਲਿੇ ਹੋ, ਤਾਂ ਭਾਸ਼ਾ ਧ ਿੱਚ ਸਹਾਇਤਾ  ਸੇ ਾ ਤੁਹਾਡੇ ਲਈ ਮੁਫਤ ਉਪਲਬਿ  ਹੈ। 800-722-1471 (TTY:  711) 'ਤੇ ਕਾਲ ਕਰੋ। 
เรียน : ถ้าคุณพูดภาษาไทยคุณสามารถใช้บริการช่วยเหลือทางภาษาได้ฟรี  โทร 800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ACHTUNG : Wenn Sie Deutsch sprechen, stehen Ihnen kostenlos sprachliche Hilfsdienstleistungen zur Verfügung. Rufnummer: 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
UWAGA : Jeżeli mówisz po polsku, możesz skorzystać z bezpłatnej pomocy językowej. Zadzwoń pod numer 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATANSYON : Si w pale Kreyòl Ayisyen, gen sèvis èd pou lang ki disponib gratis pou ou.  Rele 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATTENTION  : Si vous parlez français, des services d'aide linguistique vous sont proposés gratuitement.  Appelez le 800 -722-1471  (ATS :  711).  
ATENÇÃO : Se fala português, encontram -se disponíveis serviços linguísticos, grátis.  Ligue para 800 -722-1471  (TTY: 711).  
ATTENZIONE : In caso la lingua parlata sia l'italiano, sono disponibili servizi di assistenza linguistica gratuiti. Chiamare il numero  800-722-1471  (TTY: 711).   
 توجه: اگر به زبان فارسی گفتگو می کنید، تسهیالت زبانی بصورت رايگان برای شما فراهم می باشد. با   (TTY: 711) 1471-722-800   .تماس بگیريد 