    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
  
 
 
            
 
 
   
 
       
          
    
 
           
    
         
  
      
     
           
     
 
       
         
       
    
  
   
 Mechanical  Stretching  Devices  for  Contracture  and  Joint  Stiffness  - Medical  Clinical  Policy  Bulletins  |  Aetna  Page 1 of 31 
Mechanical Stretching Devices for
Contracture and Joint Stiffness 
POLICY HISTORY 
Last Review: 06/17/2022 
Effective:  04/04/2000 
Next Review: 04/13/2023 Number: 0405 
POLICY 
*Please see amendment for Pennsylvania Medicaid at the end of this CPB. 
Dynamic Splinting Devices 
Aetna considers dynamic splinting devices for the knee, elbow, wrist, 
fi
nger, or toe medically necessary durable medical equipment (DME) if 
either of the following two selection criteria is met: 
1. As an adjunct to physical therapy in members with documented signs 
and symptoms of significant motion stiffness/loss in the sub- acute 
injury or post- operative period (i.e., at least 3 weeks after injury or 
surgery); or 
2. For members who have a prior documented history of motion 
stiffness/loss in a joint, have had a surgery or procedure done to 
improve motion to that joint, and are in the acute post-operative period 
following a second or subsequent surgery or procedure. 
Note : Dynamic splinting systems include, but are not limited to, such 
produc
ts as Advance Dynamic ROM, Dynasplint, EMPI Advance Dynamic 
ROM, LMB Pro-glide, Pro-glide Dynamic ROM, SaeboFlex, SaeboReach, 
Stat-A- Dyne, and Ultraflex.                    
 
        
     
    
    
 
         
     
           
     
        
         
       
      
  
 
    
     
           
  
 
   
 
     
 
     
       
 
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 2 of 31 
Note : The SaeboMas dynamic mobile arm support system, the Kinovo 
mechanical mobile arm support and similar devices are considered 
experimental and investigational because of insufficient published evidence of its clinical value. 
Aetna considers the prophylactic use of dynamic splinting experimental 
and investigational in the management of chronic contractures (no significant change in motion for a 4-month period) and joint stiffness due 
to joint trauma, fractures, burns, head and spinal cord injuries, rheumatoid 
arthritis, multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy or cerebral palsy because 
of insufficient evidence in the peer-reviewed literature. However, if 
surgery is being performed for a “chronic” condition, the use of a dynamic splinting system may be considered medically necessary if the member meets the selection criteria stated above. 
Aetna considers the use of dynamic splinting experimental and investigational for the following indications (not an all -inclusive list) 
because there is a lack of scientific evidence regarding its effectiveness 
for these indications: 
Carp
al tunnel syndrome 
Cer
ebral palsy 
Foot dro
p associated with neuromuscular diseases 
Hallu
x valgus 
Head and s
pinal cord injuries 
Impr
ovement of outcomes following botulinum toxin injection for 
treatment of limb spasticity 
Inju
ries of the ankle, and shoulder 
Mult
iple sclerosis 
Musc
ular dystrophy 
Plan
tar fasciitis 
Rhe
umatoid arthritis 
Stro
ke 
Trism
us. 
Flexionators and Extensionators                    
 
     
      
      
          
        
      
      
 
     
 
          
      
        
   
 
      
     
        
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
  
          
 
 
 
 
       
          
    Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 3 of 31 
Aetna considers patient -actuated serial stretch (PASS) devices (e.g., the 
ERMI Knee/Ankle flexionator, the ERMI Shoulder flexionator, the ERMI 
Elbow extensionator, the ERMI Knee extensionator, the ERMI MPJ extensionator, JAS EZ (ankle, elbow, finger, knee extens ion, knee flexion, 
pronation/ supination, shoulder, toe and wrist), and knee extension 
devices (e.g., the Elite Seat) experimental and investigational because of insufficient scientific evidence of the effectiveness of these devices. 
Joint Active Systems (JAS) Splints 
Aetna considers JAS splints (e.g., JAS Elbow, JAS Shoulder, JAS Knee, JAS Wrist, and JAS Pronation- Supination) experimental and 
investigational because there is insufficient evidence in the peer -reviewed 
published medical literature concerning their effectiveness. 
Aetna considers the use of the EZ Turnbuckle orthosis (JAS orthosis) 
after open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) for radial head fracture 
experimental and investigational because its effectiveness has not been 
established. 
Dynam ic Adjustable Ankle Extension/Flexion Device 
Aetna  considers  dynam
 ic  adjustable  ankle  extension/flexion  device  (e.g.,  
JAS  Ankle)  medically  necessary  for  the treatment  of  contractures.  See 
CPB 0565 -  Ankle  Orthoses, Ankle -Foot Orthoses (AFOs), and Knee ­ 
Ankle- Foot Orthoses (KAFOs) (../500_599/0565.html ).  
Medi -Dy
ne Prostretch Device 
Aetna considers the Medi -Dyne Prostretch device experimental and 
investigational because of a lack of evidence regarding its effectiveness. 
BACKGROUND 
Mechanical stretching devices differ from continuous passive 
motion devices in that they are nonmotorized and include the following 
types: low -load pr olonged- duration stretch (LLPS) devices, patient ­                   
 
    
         
     
 
 
   Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 4 of 31 
actuated serial stretch (PASS) devices and static progressive stretch 
(SPS) devices. Mechanical stretching devices are generally proposed as 
an adjunct treatment to PT and/or exercise. 
LLPS devices, also referred  to as dynamic  splinting, permit active  
and  passive  motion  with  elastic  traction  within  a  limited  range  and 
maintain a set level of tension by means of incorporated springs.  
Examples of LLPS devices include, but may  not be limited to, 
Advance Dynamic ROM, Dynasplint, EMPI Advance Dynamic ROM,  
Proglide Advance Dynamic  ROM, LMB Pro -Glide, SaeboFlex, 
SaeboReach, Stat -A-Dyne and Ultraﬂex.  
PASS devices are purported to permit active and passive motion  
with  elastic  traction  within  a  limited  range,  but  also  provide  a  low- 
to high -level load to the joint using pneumatic, hydraulic or  
tensioning systems  that  can be adjusted by the individual.  
Examples  of  PASS  devices  include,  but  may  not  be  limited  to,  Elite  
Seat, ERMI  Elbow Extensionater, ERMI Knee Extensionater, ERMI  
Knee/Ankle Flexionater and ERMI Shoulder Flexionater, JAS EZ  
Systems  (ankle,  elbow,  ﬁnger,  knee extension,  knee ﬂexion, 
pronation/supination, shoulder, toe and wrist).  
SPS devices hold the joint in a set  position but are purported to  
allow  for  manual  modiﬁcation  of  the j oint angle w  ithout exerting  
stress on  the tissue unless the angle is set to the joint’s limitations.  
While  these  devices  allow  for  movement  (passive  or  active)  within  
a limited range,  the motion  is free and does not provide elastic  
traction. Examples of SPS devices include, but may not  be limited  
to, Joint Active Systems (JAS) Splints ( e.g., JAS Ankle, JAS Elbow, JAS  
Knee, JAS Pronation -Supination, JAS Shoulder, JAS Wrist).  
Jaw  mo
bility  mechanical  stretching  devices  are  suggested  for  use 
in the treatment of temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorders,  
trismus  or other conditions in which jaw movement is limited.  
Examples of this type of mechanical stretching device include, but  
may  not  be  limited  to,  TheraBite  Jaw  Motion  Rehabilitation  System,  
Dynasplint Trismus  System or  Orastretch.  
Dynam
ic Splinting Systems                    
 
    
         
          
       
      
     
      
     
        
     
 
    
  
           
 
 
      
  
 
           
     
    
   
 
        
  
     
   
    
     
      
       
    
         
 Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 5 of 31 
Dynamic splinting systems are spring -loaded, adjustable devices 
designed to provide low -load prolonged stretch while patients are asleep 
or at rest. Dynamic splinting units (for both extension as well as flexion) 
are available for elbow, wrist, fingers, knee, ankle and toes. These units 
are being marketed for the treatment of joint stiffness due to immobili zation or limited range of motion (ROM) as a consequence of 
fractures, dislocations, tendon and ligament repairs, joint arthroplasties, total knee replacements, burns, rheumatoid arthritis, hemophilia, tendon releases, head trauma, spinal cord injuries, ce rebral palsy (CP), multiple 
sclerosis, and other traumatic and non- traumatic disorders. 
Dynamic splinting is commonly used in the post -operative period for the 
prevention or treatment of motion stiffness/loss in the knee, elbow, wrist or 
finger. It is not generally used in other joints such as the hip, ankle or foot. 
Product names commonly encountered on the market for dynamic 
splinting include: Dynasplint™, Ultraflex™, LMB Pro- glide™, EMPI 
Advance™ and SaeboFlex™. 
The SaeboFlex has been promoted for use in rehabilitation in persons 
with hemiplegia following cerebrovascular accident. However, there is no 
peer-reviewed published medical literature of the effectiveness of the 
device for this indication. 
Goodyear -Smith and Arroll (2004) undertook a literature review to 
produce evidence- based recommendations for non- surgical family 
physician management of carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). These 
investigators assessed 2 systematic reviews, 16 randomized controlled 
trials, and 1 before- and-after study using hist orical controls. A 
considerable percentage of CTS resolves spontaneously. There is strong 
evidence that local corticosteroid injections, and to a lesser extent oral corticosteroids, give short -term relief for CTS sufferers. There is limited 
evidence to indicate that splinting, laser -acupuncture, yoga, and 
therapeutic ultrasound may be effective in the short- to-medium term (up 
to 6 months).                    
 
      
         
    
    
        
    
     
         
   
       
      
      
      
        
          
  
           
          
 
         
       
         
    
     
          
        
    
        
          
       
     
   
    
   
             
     
     
     
      Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 6 of 31 
Graham et al (2004) evaluated the role of steroid injections combined with 
wrist splinting for the management of CTS. A total of 73 patients with 99 
affected hands were studied. Patients presenting with known medical causes or muscle wasting were excluded. Diagnosis was made clinically 
and electrodiagnostic studies were performed only when equivocal 
clinical signs were present. Each patient received up to 3 betamethasone 
injections into the carpal tunnel and wore a neutral -position wrist splint 
continuously for 9 weeks. After that period, symptomatic patients 
received an open carpal tunnel release, and those who remained 
asymptomatic were followed- up regularly for at least 1 year. Patients who 
relapsed were scheduled for surgery. At a minimum follow -up of 1 year, 7 
patients (9.6 %) with 10 affected hands (10.1 %) remained asymptomatic. 
This group had a significantly shorter duration of symptoms (2.9 months versus 8.35 months; p = 0.039, Mann- Whitney test) and significantly less 
sensory change (40 % versus 72 %; p = 0.048, Fisher's exact test) at presentation when compared with the group who had surgery. It is 
concluded that steroid injections and wrist splinting are effective for relief 
of CTS symptoms; but have a long- term effect in only 10 % of patients. 
In a systematic review, Larson and Jerosch -Herold (2008) examined 
the clinical effectiveness of post -operative splinting after surgical release 
of Dupuytren's contracture. Studies were included if they met the 
following inclusion criteria: prospective or retrospective, experimental, 
quasi -experimental or observational studies investigating the 
effectiveness of static or dynamic splints worn day and/or night -time for at 
least 6 weeks after surgery and reporting either individual joint or 
composite finger range of motion and/or hand function. The 
methodological quality of the selected articles was independently 
assessed by the two authors using the guidelines for evaluating the 
quality of intervention studies developed by McDermid. Four studies, with sample sizes ranging from 23 to 268, met the inclusion criteria for the systematic review. Designs included retrospective case review, 
prospective observational and one controlled trial without randomization. 
Interventions included dynamic and static splinting with a mean follow -up 
ranging from 9 weeks to 2 years. Pooling of results was not possible due 
to the heterogeneity of interventions (splint type, duration and wearing 
regimen) and the way outcomes were reported. The authors concluded that there is empirical evidence to support the use of low -load prolonged 
stretch through splinting after hand surgery and trauma, however only a                    
 
       
     
       
         
   
    
     
            
    
   
    
 
       
           
         
        
    
          
     
    
     
     
     
        
       
      
       
    
       
   
    
      
      
       
      
       
  
     
     Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 7 of 31 
few studies have investigated this specifically in Dupuytren's contracture. 
The low level evidence regarding the effect of post -operative static and 
dynamic splints on final extension deficit in severe PIP joint contracture (greater than 40 degrees) is equivocal, as is the effect of patient 
adherence on outcome. While total active extension deficit improved in 
some patients wearing a splint, there were also deficits in composite 
finger flexion and hand function. The lack of data on the magnitude of 
this effect makes it difficult to interpret whether this is of clinical significance. There is a need for well -designed controlled trials with 
proper randomization to evaluate the short -term and long- term 
effectiveness of splinting following Dupuytren's surgery. 
Foot drop usually refers to weakness or contracture of the muscles 
around the ankle joint. It may arise from many neuromuscular diseases. 
In a Cochrane review, Sackley and colleagues (2009) performed 
a systematic review of randomized trials for the treatment of foot drop resulting from neuromuscular disease. Randomized and quasi -
randomized trials of physical, orthotic and surgical treatments for foot 
drop resulting from lower motor neuron or muscle disease and related contractures were included. People with primary joint disease were excluded. Interventions included a "wait and see" approach, physiotherapy, orthoses, surgery and pharmacological therapy. The 
primary outcome measure was quantified ability to walk while secondary 
outcome measures included range of motion (ROM), dorsiflexor torque 
and strength, measures of activity and participation, quality of life and 
adverse effects. Methodological quality was evaluated by 2 authors using 
the van Tulder criteria. Four studies with a total of 152 participants were 
included in the review. Heterogeneity of the studies precluded pooling the 
data. Early surgery did not significantly affect walking speed in a trial 
including 20 children with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Both groups 
deteriorated during the 12 months follow -up. After 1 year, the mean 
difference (MD) of the 28- feet walking time was 0.00 seconds (95 % 
confidence interval [CI]: -0.83 to 0.83) and the MD of the 150- feet walking 
time was -2.88 seconds, favoring the control group (95 % CI: -8.18 to 
2.42). Night splinting of the ankle did not significantly affect muscle force 
or ROM about the ankle in a trial of 26 participants with Charcot -Marie -
Tooth disease. Improvements were observed in both the splinting and 
control groups. In a trial of 26 participants with Charcot -Marie -Tooth 
disease and 28 participants with myotonic dystrophy, 24 weeks of                    
 
 
       
   
   
    
     
      
        
        
      
       
   
     
      
           
     
    Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 8 of 31 
strength  training  significantly  improved  6-meter  timed  walk  in  the  Charcot - 
Marie -Tooth group compared to the control  group (MD  0.70 seconds,  
favoring strength training,  95  %  CI:  0.23 to 1.17),  but  not  in the myotonic  
dystrophy  group (MD  -0.20 seconds,  favoring the control  group,  95 %  CI:  
-0.79 to  0.39).  No  significant  differences  were  observed  for  the 50 -meter  
timed  walk  in  the  Charcot -Marie -Tooth  disease  group  (MD  1.90  seconds,  
favoring the training group,  95 %  CI:  -0.29 to 4.09)  or  the myotonic  
dystrophy  group  (MD  -0.80  seconds,  favoring  the  control  group,  95  %  CI:  
-5.29 to 3.69).  In a trial  of  65 participants  with facio- scapulo- humeral  
muscular  dystrophy,  26 weeks  of  strength training did not  significantly  
affect  ankle strength.  After  1 year,  the mean difference in  maximum  
voluntary  isometric  contraction  was  -0.43  kg,  favoring  the  control  group 
(95  %  CI:  -2.49  to  1.63)  and  the  mean  difference  in  dynamic  strength  was  
0.44  kg,  favoring  the  training  group  (95  %  CI:  -0.89  to  1.77).  The  authors  
concluded that  only  1 study,  involving people with Charcot -Marie -Tooth 
disease,  demonstrated  a  statistically  significant  positive  effect  of  strength 
training.  No effect  of  strength training was  found in people with either  
myotonic  dystrophy  or  facio -scapulo- humeral  muscular  dystrophy.  
Surgery  had no significant  effect  in children with Duchenne muscular  
dystrophy  and night  splinting of  the ankle had no significant  effect  in 
people with Charcot -Marie -Tooth disease.  They  stated that  more 
evidence generated by  methodologically  sound studies  is  needed.  
In another Cochrane review, Rose et al (2010) evaluated the effect of 
interventions to reduce or resolve ankle equinus in people with neuromuscular disease. Randomized controlled trials evaluating 
interventions for increasing ankle dorsiflexion ROM in neuromuscular 
disease. Outcomes included ankle dorsiflexion ROM, functional 
improvement, foot alignment, foot and ankle muscle strength, health-
related quality of life, satisfaction with the intervention and adverse 
events. Two authors independently selected papers, assessed trial 
quality and extracted data. Four studies involving 149 participants met 
inclusion criteria for this review. Two studies assessed the effect of night 
splinting in a total of 26 children and adults with Charcot -Marie -Tooth 
disease type 1A. There were no statistically or clinically significant 
differences between wearing a night splint and not wearing a night splint. One study assessed the efficacy of prednisone treatment in 103 boys with 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. While a daily dose of prednisone at 0.75 
mg/kg/day resulted in significant improvements in some strength and                    
 
    
        
             
     
   
        
        
     
      
     
     
 
       
    
           
       
      
     
          
       
     
     
       
      
       
    
 
          
    
     
        
    
 
           
      
        
       
         
     Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 9 of 31 
function parameters compared with placebo, there was no significant 
difference in ankle ROM between groups. Increasing the prednisone 
dose to 1.5 mg/kg/day had no significant effect on ankle ROM. One study 
evaluated early surgery in 20 young boys with Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy. Surgery resulted in increased ankle dorsiflexion range at 12 
months but functional outcomes favored the control group. By 24 
months, many boys in the surgical group experienced a relapse of 
achilles tendon contractures. The authors concluded that there is no evidence of significant benefit from any intervention for increasing ankle 
ROM in Charcot -Marie -Tooth disease type 1A or Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy. They stated that more research is needed. 
In a pilot study, Postans and colleagues (2010) investigated the feasibility 
of applying the combination of dynamic splinting and neuromuscular 
electric al stimulation (NMES) in order to improve wrist and elbow function, 
and ROM, in children with upper limb contractures due to CP. A total of 
6 children aged 7 to 16, with contractures at the wrist or elbow, were 
recruited. Following a 12- week baseline period all subjects underwent a 
12-week treatment period where dynamic splinting was used for 1 hour 
per day and combined with NMES for the second half of the 1- hr 
treatment. A 12- week follow -up period then ensued. Upper limb function 
was assessed with the Melbourne assessment, physical disability with the Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Index and the Activity Scale for Kids, and quality of life with the Pediatric Quality of Life Scale. Passive and active ROM at the wrist and elbow were measured using manual and electrical 
goniometers. The technique of using combined NMES and dynamic 
splinting was demonstrated to be feasible and compliance with the intervention was good. There was an increase in passive elbow 
extension in 2 subjects treated for elbow contractures, although no accompanying change in upper limb function was reported. Wrist ROM 
improved in 1 subject treated for wrist contracture. The findings of this 
pilot study need to be validated by well -designed studies. 
John et al (2011) stated that hallux limitus (HL) is a pathology of degenerative arthritis in the first metatarsophalangeal joint (MTJ) of the great toe. Chief complaints of HL include inflammation, edema, pain, and reduced flexibility. The onset of HL commonly occurs after one of the two 
most common surgical procedures for foot pathologies, a bunionectomy 
or a cheilectomy. These investigators determined the effectiveness of                    
 
         
       
      
       
     
     
            
      
       
     
     
            
     
        
   
       
      
   
 
        
       
       
        
            
       
     
     
      
        
        
    
       
   
       
    
      
       
          
       Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 10 of 31 
dynamic splinting in treating patients with post-operative hallux limitus, in 
a randomized, controlled trial. A total of 50 patients (aged 29 to 69 years) 
were enrolled after diagnosis of HL following surgery. The duration of this 
study was 8 weeks, and all patients received non- steroidal anti -
inflammatory drugs, orthotics, and instructions for a home exercise program. Experimental patients were also treated with dynamic splinting for first MTJ extension (60 mins, 3 times per day). The dependent 
variable was change in active ROM (AROM). A repeated measures analysis of variance was used with independent variables of patient 
categories, surgical procedure (cheilectomy versus bunionectomy) and 
duration since surgery. There was a significant difference in change of AROM for experimental versus control patients (p < 0.001, T = 4.224, n = 48); there was also a significant difference for patient treated within 2 months of surgery (p = 0.0221). The authors concluded that dynamic 
splinting was effective in reducing contracture of post -operative hallux 
limitus in this study; experimental patients gained a mean 250 % 
improvement in AROM. This modality should be considered for standard of care in treating post -operative hallux limitus. 
Sameem et al (2011) stated that controversy exists as to which rehabilitation protocol provides the best outcomes for patients after surgical repair of the extensor tendons of the hand. These 
researchers determined which rehabilitation protocol yields the best 
outcomes with respect to ROM and grip strength in extensor zones V-VIII 
of the hand. A comprehensive literature review and assessment was undertaken by 2 independent reviewers. Methodological quality of 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and cohort studies was assessed using the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network scale. A total of 17 articles w ere included in the final analysis (κ = 0.9). From this total, 7 
evaluated static splinting, 12 evaluated dynamic splinting, and 4 
evaluated early active splinting. Static splinting yielded "excellent/good" 
results ranging from 63 % (minimum) to 100 % (maximum) on the total 
active motion (TAM) classification scheme and TAM ranging from 185° (minimum) to 258° (maximum) across zones V -VIII. Dynamic 
splinting studies demonstrated a percentage of "excellent/good" results 
ranging from 81 % (minimum) and 100 % (maximum) and TAM ranging 
from 214° (minimum) and 261° (maximum). Early active splinting studies 
showed "excellent/good" results ranging from 81 % (minimum) and 100 % 
(maximum). Only 1 study evaluated TAM in zones V -VIII, which ranged                    
 
       
     
         
      
   
 
 
       
    
       
      
    
    
        
          
    
 
     
     
           
       
     
      
    
 
         
     
          
       
   
        
         
    
     
           
      
    
         
          Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 11 of 31 
from 160° (minimum) and 165° (maximum) when using 2 different early 
active modalities. The authors concluded that the available level 3 
evidence suggested better outcomes when using dynamic splinting over 
static splinting. Moreover, they stated that additional studies comparing 
dynamic and early active motion protocols are needed before a 
conclusive recommendation can be made. 
Trismus refers to the spastic contraction of the muscles of mastication, 
which can lead to mandibular hypomobility. Mandibular hypomobil ity is a 
condition in which the patient lacks normal ROM in the 
temporomandibular joint (TMJ). Patients suffering from this condition are 
unable to separate the maxilla and mandible without pain, or simply are 
unable to open the mouth to the extent of func tional disability. They are 
unable to chew or eat normally or without pain, and may be unable to 
speak normally or maintain proper oral hygiene. Severe jaw hypomobility 
can lead to malnutrition, infection, and serious disability. 
The Dynasplint Trismus System is designed to aid in restoring physical 
function in patients suffering from joint or muscle stiffness and limited range ROM in the posterior mandibular or TMJ region. These functional 
limitations can be caused by a variety of conditions, such as: TMJ dysfunction, head and neck cancers, head and neck surgery, radiation therapy, fractures, trauma, infection, burns, congenital/developmental conditions, osteoarthritis, scleroderma, and others. 
Stubblefield et al (2010) conducted a retrospective cohort study 
examining the effectiveness of a dynamic jaw opening device (Dynasplint Trismus System [DTS]) as part of a multi -modal treatment strategy for 
trismus in 20 patients with head and neck cancer. All patients underwent 
assessment by a board- certified physiatrist and were referred to physical 
therapy for delivery of the DTS and instructed to progress use of the DTS 
to 30 minutes 3 times a day. Additional modalities for the treatment of 
trismus including pain medications and botulinum t oxin injections were 
prescribed as clinically indicated. Change in maximal interincisal distance 
(MID) as documented in the medical record. The use of the DTS as part 
of multi -modal therapy including physical therapy, pain medications, and 
botulinum toxin injections as deemed clinically appropriate resulted in an 
overall improvement of the MID from 16.5 mm to 23.5 mm (p < 0.001). 
Patients who could comply with the treatment recommendations for DTS                    
 
            
          
 
 
    
         
        
        
      
         
        
      
       
         
           
        
      
          
       
     
            
    
   
 
 
       
       
     
       
    
       
         
     
       Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 12 of 31 
treatment did better than those who could not, with an improvement of the 
MID from 16 mm to 27 mm (p < 0.001) versus 17 mm to 22 mm (p = 
0.88). 
In a retrospective clinical trial, Schulman and colleagues (2008) evaluated 
the effect of the DTS (Dynasplint Systems Inc, Severna Park, MD) for 
patients recently diagnosed with trismus following radiation therapy, 
dental treatment, oral surgery, or following a neural pathology such as a stroke. The histories of 48 patient (treated in 2006 to 2007) were 
reviewed, and divided into 4 cohort groups (radiation therapy for 
head/neck cancer, dental treatment, oral surgery, or stroke), to measure 
the efficacy of this treatment's modality. Patients were prescribed the 
DTS after diagnosis of trismus based on examination that showed less 
than 40 mm MID. The DTS uses low -load, prolonged -duration stretch 
with replicable, dynamic tension to achieve longer time at end ROM. 
Each patient used this device for 20 to 30 mins, 3 times per day. In this 
cohort case series the results showed that there was a statistically 
significant difference within all patient groups (p < 0.0001; t = 10.3289), 
but there was not a significant difference between groups (p = 0.374). The biomechanical modality of DTS with a low -load, prolonged- duration 
stretch was attributed to the success in reducing contracture in this study. 
This improved ROM allowed patients to regain the eating, hygiene and speaking patterns they had before developing trismus. 
Guidelines  f
 rom  the International  Society  for  Oral  Oncology  (2011)  state 
that  "[n]o guideline [is]  possible regarding use of  Dynasplint® Trismus 
System  in the reduction of  RT-induced trismus,  although  may  have some 
benefit  for  reduction  of  contracture  of  the  muscles  of  mastication  (Level  of  
evidence III,  Recommendation grade B)."  
Furia et al (2013) evaluated the safety and effectiveness of dynamic 
splinting as it is used to treat joint contracture in lower extremities, and determined if duration on total hours of stretching had an effect on outcomes. Reviews of PubMed, Science Direct, Medline, AMED, and 
EMBASE websites were conducted to identify the term 'contracture 
reduction' in manuscripts published from January 2002 to January 2012. 
Publications selected for inclusion were controlled trials, cohort studies, or 
case series studies employing prolonged, passive stretching for lower extremity contracture reduction. A total of 354 abstracts were screened                    
 
     
   
     
    
     
     
      
         
       
   
 
 
          
     
       
       
      
      
   
        
     
     
   
            
    
    
      
        
      
         
    
  
        
   
 
        
  Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 13 of 31 
and 8 studies (487 subjects) met the inclusion criteria. The primary 
outcome measure was change in active ROM (AROM). The mean 
aggregate change in AROM was 23.5° in the 8 studies examined. 
Dynamic splinting with prolonged, passive stretching as home therapy 
treatment showed a significant direct, linear correlation between the total 
number of hours in stretching and restored AROM. No adverse events 
were reported. The authors concluded that dynamic splinting is a safe and effective treatment for lower extremity joint contractures. Joint 
specific stretching protocols accomplished greater durations of end- range 
stretching that may be considered to be responsible for connective tissue elongation. 
Veltman et al (2015) performed a comprehensive review of the literature 
to evaluate the best current evidence for non- operative treatment options 
for post- traumatic elbow stiffness. These investigators performed a 
search of all studies on non- operative treatment for elbow stiffness in 
human adults. All articles describing non- operative treatment of elbow 
stiffness, written in the English, German, French or Dutch language, including human adult patients and with the functional outcome reported were included in this study. A total of 8 studies (including 232 patients) 
met the eligibility criteria and were included for data analysis and pooling. These studies included 1 RCT and 7 retrospective cohort studies. Static progressive splinting was evaluated in 160 patients. The average pre­
splinting ROM of all elbows was 72°, which improved by 36° after 
splinting to an average post -splinting arc of motion of 108° . Dynamic 
splinting was evaluated in 72 patients with an average pre- splinting ROM 
of 63°. The average improvement was 37° to an average post -splinting 
arc of motion of 100°. The authors concluded that both dynamic orthoses and static progressive splinting showed good results for the treatment of elbow stiffness, regardless of etiology. The choice for one treatment over 
the other is based on the preference of the surgeon and patient. These 
investigators recommended continuing non- operative treatment with 
dynamic or static bracing for 12 months or until patients stop making 
progression in ROM of the elbow. 
Dynamic Splinting to Improve Outcomes following Botulinum Toxin 
Injection for Treatment of Limb Spasticity                    
 
 
     
 
        
       
       
       
     
      
    
        
      
      
         Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 14 of 31 
Mills  and colleagues  (2016)  examined the quality  of  evidence from  RCTs  
on the effectiveness  of  adjunct  therapies  following botulinum  toxin (BTX)  
injections  for  limb  spasticity.  MEDLINE,  EMBASE,  CINAHL,  and 
Cochrane  Central  Register  of  Controlled  Trials  electronic  databases  were 
searched  for  English language  human  studies  from  1980  to  May  21,  
2015.  Randomized controlled trials  evaluating adjunct  therapies  post- 
BTX  injection for  treatment  of  spasticity  were included.  Of  the 268  
studies  screened,  17  met  selection  criteria.  Two  reviewers  independently  
assessed  risk  of  bias  using  the  Physiotherapy  Evidence  Database 
(PEDro)  scale and graded according to Sackett's  levels  of  evidence.  A 
total  of  10 adjunct  therapies  were identified.  Evidence suggested that  
adjunctive use of  ES,  modified constraint -induced movement  therapy,  
physiotherapy  (all  Level  1),  casting and dynamic  splinting (both Level  2)  
result  in improved Modified Ashworth Scale scores  by  at  least  1 grade.  
There  is  Level  1  and  2  evidence  that  adjunctive  taping,  segmental  
muscle vibration,  cyclic  functional  ES,  and motorized arm  ergometer  may  
not  improve  outcomes  compared  with  BTX  injections  alone.  There  is 
Level  1  evidence  that  casting  is  better  than  taping,  taping  is  better  than 
ES  and stretching,  and extra -corporeal  shock  wave therapy  is  better  than 
ES  for  outcomes  including  the  Modified  Ashworth  Scale,  ROM  and  gait.  
All  results  are based on single studies.  The authors  concluded that  there  
is  high level  evidence to suggest  that  adjunctive therapies  may  improve 
outcomes  following BTX  injection.  Moreover,  they  stated that  no results  
have been confirmed by  independent  replication;  all  interventions  would 
benefit  from  further  study.  
Dynamic Splinting for Hallux Valgus 
Plaass and colleagues (2020) noted that vallux valgus is a common 
diagnosis in orthopedics. Only a few studies have analyzed the effects of 
conservative therapy. These investigators analyzed the effect of a 
dynamic hallux valgus splint. A total of 70 patients were included in this 
prospective, randomized trial. Patients with a hallux valgus were treated 
using a dynamic splint or underwent no treatment. Clinical and 
radiological parameters were evaluated. These researchers found no 
significant changes in hallux valgus angle, inter -metat arsal I -II angle, the 
American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) score, foot and 
ankle outcome score (FAOS), or the 36- Item Short Form Health Survey 
(SF-36) score between the groups. However, a significant between- group                    
 
            
      
      
       
  
 
 
   
 
        
        
      
        
      
      Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 15 of 31 
difference was found for pain during walking and running and in the FAOS 
sub-scale for pain and pain at rest at follow -up. The authors concluded 
that wearing a dynamic hallux valgus splint provided some pain relief in 
patients with a symptomatic hallux valgus, but showed no effect on hallux 
valgus position. 
An  U pToDate  review  on  “Hallux  valgus  deformity  (bunion)”  (Ferrari,  2019  ) 
states  that  “Studies  of  splinting for  hallux  valgus  are limited by  their  small  
sample sizes  and risk  of  bias.  Night  splints  were  ineffective in reducing 
pain associated with HV  deformity  in one small  randomized trial.  
Progression of  the deformity  did not  occur  in the treatment  or  the control  
group over  the 6- month trial  duration.  Night  splints  were more effective in 
reducing deformity  and pain than a toe separator,  but  they  were less  
effective than exercises,  in another  small  study.  However,  the mean 
decrease in HA  angle was  approximately  2 degrees,  which was  within the 
range of  measurement  error.  A  study  of  30 patients  comparing ni ght  
splints  to a toe separator  attached to a semi -rigid insole reported a 
significant  reduction in  pain intensity  at  3  months  in  the group  using  the 
toe separator  insole,  but  changes  in HA  and IMA  angles  were not  
significantly  different  and the  decrease in pain in the insole group may  be 
attributable to the change in footwear.  A  study  of  30 subjects  compared 
night  splints  to a slipper  containing a toe separator  reported improvement  
in the HV  angle in the slipper  group after  1 year  but  is  the changes  were 
not  clinically  meaningful.  A  study  of  20 female subjects  comparing taping 
and exercises  versus  exercise alone reported statistically  significant  
short- term  reductions  in  pain  and  improved  walking  in  the  taping  group.  
This  study  also reported improvements  for  both groups  in HV  and IM  
angles,  but  the changes  were small  and within the margin of  error”.  
Moreover,  this  review  does  not  mention  dynamic  splinting  as  a 
therapeutic  option.  
Fl
exionators and Extensionators 
The shoulder flexionator (ERMI Shoulder Flexionater) is designed to 
isolate and treat decreased glenohumeral abduction and external 
rotation. The device is intended to addresses the needs of patients with 
excessive scar tissue. This customizable device has biomechanically and 
anatomical ly located pads to focus treatment on the glenohumeral joint, 
without stressing the other shoulder joints. Once customized, the                    
 
      
      
   
      
        
 
 
     
      
     
      
   
    
     
    
  
    
         
   
       
     
    
     
 
    
      
        
     
      
      
         
     
            
       
        
     
    
    
      Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 16 of 31 
shoulder flexionator can be used by the patient at home without 
assistance to perform serial stretching exercises, alternately stretching 
and relaxing the scar tissue surrounding the glenohumeral joint. The 
device has 3 sections, the main frame, arm unit and pump unit. The 
shoulder flexionator was listed with the FDA in 2001, and is Class I exempt. 
The knee/ankle flexionator (ERMI Knee/Ankle Flexionater) is a self -
contained device that facilitates recovery from decreased range of motion 
of the knee and/or ankle joints. The knee flexionator is designed to 
address the needs of patients with arthrofibrosis (excessive scar tissue 
within and around a joint). The knee/ankle flexionator is a variable load/variable position device that uses a hydraulic pump and quick -
release mechanism to allow patients to perform dynamic stretching 
exercises in the home without assistance, alternately stretching and relaxing the scar tissue surrounding affected joints. The knee/ankle 
flexionator includes a frame to house hydraulic components, a pump handle and quick release valve for patient control, supporting footplate 
and specially incorporated padded chair. The frame attaches to a folding 
chair and is adjustable to accommodate treatment of either extremity, or 
both extremities simultaneously. The load potential ranges from a few 
ounces up to 500 foot- pounds. The knee/ankle flexionator was listed with 
the FDA in 2002, and is Class 1 exempt. 
The knee extensionator (ERMI Knee Extensionater) and elbow extensionator (ERMI Shoulder Extensionater) provide serial stretching, using a patient -controlled pneumatic device that can deliver variable 
loads to the affected joint. The manufacturer claims that the knee and shoulder extensionators are the only devices on the market that can “consistently stretch scar tissue, without causing vascular re- injury and 
thereby significantly reduce the need for additional surgery” (ERMI, 
2002). The extensionator telescopes to the appropriate length, and is 
applied to the leg with Velcro straps. During a typical training session, the 
joint is stretched from 1 to 5 mins, and then is allowed to recover for an equal length of time, and is then stretched again. A typical training session lasts 15 mins, and the usual prescription is to perform 4 to 8 
training sessions per day. There are no controlled published peer -
reviewed studies on the effectiveness of the knee/ankle flexionator, the 
shoulder flexionator, the knee extensionator, or the elbow extensionator.                    
 
     
        
       
          
      
       
     
   
 
  
       
          
   
 
     
 
            
        
    
    
     
        
       
          
       
   
     
        
      
      
      
       
      
         
        
   
 
       Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 17 of 31 
There is insufficient scientific evidence to support the manufacturer's 
claims that these home- based stretching devices can consistently stretch 
scar tissues without causing vascular re- injury and thus significantly 
reduce the need for additional surgery (e.g., surgery for arthrofibrosis 
after knee surgery). Furthermore, there is a lack of published data to 
support the claim that these devices can reduce the need for surgery manipulation under anesthesia. Therefore, extensionator and flexionator 
devices are considered experimental and investigational. 
The Elite Seat is a portable knee hyper -extension rehabilitation device 
that is used to correct the loss of knee extension, increase ROM, decrease knee pain and improve function. However, there is insufficient 
evidence to support the use of the Elite Seat. 
Joint Active Systems (JAS) Splints 
JAS splints (e.g., JAS Elbow, JAS Shoulder, JAS Ankle, JAS Knee, JAS 
Wrist, and JAS Pronation- Supination) (Joint Active Systems, Effingham, 
IL) use static progressive stretch. According to the manufactur er's 
website, "Static Progressive Stretch (SPS) and dynamic splinting are two 
fundamentally different techniques used to permanently lengthen shortened connective tissues." Typically, the patient sets the device 
angle at the beginning of the session, and every several mins the angle is increased. A typical session lasts 30 mins, and sessions may be 
repeated up to 3 times per day. Unlike the flexionator, the joint is not allowed to recover during the stretch period. According to the manufacturer, JAS systems are designed to simulate manual therapy. 
The manufacturer claims that JAS devices eliminate the risk of joint compression, provide soft tissue distraction, and “achieve permanent soft 
tissue lengthening in a short amount of time.” Published reports of the 
effectiveness of JAS splints are limited to case reports and small 
uncontrolled observational studies. There are no prospective randomized 
studies demonstrating that the addition of the use of JAS devices to the 
physical therapy management of patients with joint injury or surgery 
significantly improves patient's clinical outcomes. Thus, JAS splints are considered experimental and investigational. 
EZ Turnbuckle Orthosis (Joint Active Systems Orthosis)                    
 
     
          
   
      
     
   
  
       
         
 
 
            
        
  
              
        
         
            
      
    
      
     
     
   
          
   
        
 
 
            
      
        
    
       
     
        
  
 
      Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 18 of 31 
Green and McCoy (1979) reported the findings of 15 patients with acute flexion contractures of the elbow after injuries or operations were treated 
with a turnbuckle splint. Satisfactory correction was achieved in 12 patients. An average reduction in deformity of about 37 degrees was 
recorded after an average treatment period of 20 weeks. The treatment 
was unsuccessful in 3 patients with severe intra- articular damage 
because the splint caused excessive discomfort. The average 
improvement in the arc of motion of the elbow was approximately 43 
degrees. This was a small study (n = 15); its findings need to be 
validated in well -designed studies. 
Gelinas et al (2000) treated 22 patients with an elbow contracture using a 
static progressive turnbuckle splint for a mean of 4.5 +/-1.8 months. All 
had failed to improve with supervised physiotherapy and splinting. The 
mean range of flexion before splintage was from 32 +/-10 degrees to 108 
+/-19 degrees and afterwards from 26 + 10 (p = 0.02) to 127 +/ -12 
degrees (p = 0.0001). A total of 11 patients gained a “functional arc of 
movement”, defined as at least 30 degrees to 130 degrees. In 8 patients 
movement improved with turnbuckle splinting, but the functional arc was 
not achieved; 6 of these were satisfied and did not wish to proceed with surgical treatment and 2 had release of the elbow contracture. In 3 patients, movement did not improve with the use of the turnbuckle splint 
and 1 subsequently had surgical treatment. The authors concluded that 
these findings showed that turnbuckle splinting is a safe and effective treatment that should be considered in patients whose established elbow 
contractures have failed to respond to conventional physiotherapy. This 
was a small study (n = 22); its findings need to be validated in well -
designed studies. 
Bhat et al (2010) evaluated the effectiveness of a turnbuckle orthosis as a 
means of improving the range of motion (ROM) in patients with elbow stiffness. A total of 17 males and 11 females aged 8 to 68 (mean of 32) years underwent static progressive stretching using a turnbuckle orthosis 
for elbow stiffness secondary to trauma or surgery. Patients were 
instructed to wear the orthosis during the daytime for a mean of 15 hours 
and remove it during sleep as well as at breakfast, lunch, and dinner. 
One hour of ROM exercise was performed during each break. Patients 
were followed- up every month and ROM was recorded with a standard 
goniometer. The use of orthosis was discontinued when there was no                    
 
      
     
     
    
     
      
            
      
    
    
    
          
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
        
 
 
      
           
         
       
          
 
  
         
        
        
   
        
      
  Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 19 of 31 
further improvement; ROM exercise was encouraged thereafter to 
maintain the results. The extent of flexion contracture and ROM before 
and after the treatment were compared. The mean duration of orthosis 
use was 5 (range of 3 to 8) months. The mean flexion contracture 
reduced from 59 degrees to 27 degrees and ROM improved from 57 
degrees to 102 degrees; 19 of the patients achieved functional ROM. Improvement in ROM was excellent in 6 patients, good in 11, satisfactory 
in 7; at the end of follow -up (mean of 29 months), the results were 
maintained or improved further in 20 patients (even in those with long­
standing contractures). The authors concluded that static progressive 
stretching using a turnbuckle orthosis is reliable and cost -effective for 
treating elbow stiffness. Again, this was a small study (n = 28); its 
findings need to be validated in well -designed studies. 
CPT Codes/ HCPCS Codes/ICD -10 Codes 
Information  in  the  [br ackets]  below  has  been add  ed  for  clarification  
purposes. Codes requiring  a 7th character are represented by “+”  
Code Code Description 
CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met: 
29126 Application  of  short  a rm  splint  (forearm  to  hand);  dynamic  [not  
covered  for  carpal  tunnel  syndrome]  
2913
1 Application of finger splint; dynam ic 
29505 Application of long leg splint (thigh to ankle or toes) 
29515 Application of short leg splint (calf to foot) 
Other CPT codes related to the CPB: 
25515 Open treatment of radial shaft f racture, includes internal fixation, 
when performed 
29
105 Application of long arm splint (shoulder to hand) 
97760 Orthotic(s) management and training (including assessment and 
fitting when not otherwise reported), upper extremity(s), lower 
extremity(s) and/or trunk, each 15 minutes 
HCPCS codes covered if selection criteria are met: 
Advance Dynamic ROM, Pro-glide dynamic ROM, SaeboReach, EZ Turnbuckle 
Orthosis -No speciﬁc code :                    
 
   
       
 
   
      
 
 
        
 
        
        
 
  
        
 
  
       
 
   
        
 
  
         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
     
 
         
  
 
         
  
 
         
  
 Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 20 of 31 
Code Code Description 
E1800 Dynamic adjustable elbow extension/flexion device, includes 
soft interface material 
E1802 Dynamic adjustable forearm pronation/supination device, 
includes soft interface material [not covered for carpal tunnel 
syndrome] 
E1805 Dynamic adjustable wrist extension/flexion device, includes soft 
interface material [not covered for carpal tunnel syndrome] 
E1810 Dynamic adjustable knee extension/flexion device, includes soft 
interface material 
E1815 Dynamic adjustable ankle extension/flexion device, includes soft 
interface material 
E1825 Dynamic adjustable finger extension/flexion device, includes 
soft interface material 
E1830 Dynamic adjustable toe extension/flexion device, includes soft 
interface material 
E1831 Static progressive stretch toe device, extension and/or flexion, 
with or without range of motion adjustment, includes all 
components and accessories 
E1
801 Static progressive stretch elbow device, extension and/or 
flexion, with or without range of motion adjustment, includes all 
components and accessories 
E1806 Static progressive stretch wrist device, flexion and/or extension, 
with or without range of motion adjustment, includes all 
components and accessories 
E1811 Static progressive stretch knee device, extension and/or flexion, 
with or without range of motion adjustment, includes all components and accessories 
E1816 Static progressive stretch ankle device, flexion and/or extension, 
with or without range of motion adjustment, includes all components and accessories                    
 
   
       
  
 
        
 
   
      
 
    
          
 
        
       
 
 
     
     
     
     
 
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
         
 
 
     
 
           
 
 
     Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 21 of 31 
Code Code Description 
E1 818 Static progressive stretch forearm pronation/supination device, 
with or without range of motion adjustment, includes all 
components and accessories 
E1821 Replacement soft interface material/cuffs for bi-directional static 
progressive stretch device 
E1840 Dynamic adjustable shoulder flexion/abduction/rotation device, 
includes soft interface material 
E1841 Static progressive stretch shoulder device, with or without range 
of motion adjustment, includes all components and accessor ies 
L3100 Hallus -valgus night dynamic splint, prefabricated, off-the-shelf 
J0
585 Injection, onabotulinumtoxinA, 1 unit 
J0586 Injection, abobotulinumtoxinA, 5 units 
J0587 Injection, rimabotulinumtoxinB, 100 units 
J0588 Injection, incobotulinumtoxinA, 1 unit
M2
4.571  - 
M24
.576  Cont
racture, ankle and foot 
G35 Mu
lt
iple sclerosis 
G56.00  - 
G56
.03  Car
pal tunnel syndrome 
Pr
im
ary disorders of muscles and other and unspecified 
myopathies 
G8 0.0 -G80.9 Cerebral palsy 
G9 7.31  - 
G97.32  Int
raoperative  hemo rrhage  and  hematoma  of  a  nervous  system  
organ  or  structure  complicating  a  procedure  
I63.00 -I66.9 Occlusi
on and stenosis of precerebral and cerebral arteries 
[stroke] 
I9
7.810  - 
I97
.821  Int
raoperative and postprocedural cerebrovascular infarction                    
 
   
   
 
      
     
  
     
    
    Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 22 of 31 
Code Code Description 
M05.00 ­  
M05.09,  
M05.20 ­  
M06.39,  
M06.80 ­  
M06.9,  
M08.00 ­  
M08.09,  
M08.20 ­  
M08.3,  
M08.40 ­  
M08.99  Rheumatoid arthritis with rheumatoid factor,  other rheumatoid 
arthritis  and juvenile arthritis  
M20.10  - 
M20.12  Hallux va lgus (acqu ired) 
M21.371  - 
M21
.379  Foot  drop  (acquired)  [foot  drop  associated  with  neuromuscular  
diseases]  
M72.2 Pla ntar fascial fibromatosis [plantar fascitits] 
R25.2 Cramp and spasm [trismus] 
S06.0x0+  - 
S06
.9x9+  Intr
acranial injury 
S09.90x+ Unspecified injury of head 
S12.000+  ­ 
S12.9xx+,  
S14.010+  ­ 
S14.159+,  
S22.000+  ­ 
S22.089+,  
S24.101+  ­ 
S24.159+,  
S32.000+  ­ 
S32.2xx+,  
S34.101+  ­ 
S34.139+,  
S34.3xx+  F
racture of ver tebral column with spinal cord injury                    
 
   
  
      
 
 
         
 
         
 
   
         
          
        
 
         
 
   
         
 
 
  
         
 
  
         
 
            
        
          
 
           
 
  
        
         
  
 
         
  Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 23 of 31 
Code Code Description 
S52.121A -
S52.126S Fracture of head of radius 
The above policy is based on the following references: 
1. Aspinall SK, Bamber ZA, Hignett SM, et al. Medical stretching 
devices are eﬀective in the treatment of knee arthroﬁbrosis: A 
systematic review. J Orthop Translat. 2021;27:119 -131. 
2. Berner SH, Willis FB. Dynamic splinting in wrist extension 
following distal radius fractures. J Orthop Surg Res. 2010;5:53. 
3. Bhat AK, Bhaskaranand K, Nair SG. Static progressive stretching 
using a turnbuckle orthosis for elbow stiﬀness: A prospective 
study. J Orthop Surg (Hong Kong). 2010;18(1):76- 79. 
4. Blair WF, Steyers CM. Extensor tendon injuries. Orthop Clin North 
Am. 1992;23(1):141 -148. 
5. Bonutti PM, Marulanda GA, McGrath MS, et al. Static progressive 
stretch improves range of motion in arthroﬁbrosis following total 
knee arthroplasty. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2010;18(2):194 -199. 
6. Bonutti PM, McGrath MS, Ulrich SD, et al. Static progressive stretch for the treatment of knee stiﬀness. Knee. 2008;15(4):272­
276. 
7. Bonutti PM, Windau JE, Ables BA, et al. St atic progressive stretch 
to reestablish elbow range of motion. Clin Orthop. 1994;303:128­
134. 
8. Branch TP, Karsch RE, Mills TJ, Palmer MT. Mechanical therapy for 
loss of knee ﬂexion. Am J Orthop. 2003;32(4):195 -200. 
9. Browne EZ Jr, Ribik CA. Early dynamic splinting for extensor 
tendon injuries. J Hand Surg [Am]. 1989;14(1):72 -76. 
10. Bruner A, Whittemann A, Jester A, et al. Dynamic splinting after 
extensor tendon repair in zones V to VII. J Hand Surg (Br). 2003;28B(3):224 -227. 
11. Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Payment and coding determinations for new durable medical equipment. CMS 
Public Meeting Agenda. Baltimore, MD: CMS; June 17, 2002. 
12. Chester DL, Beale S, Beveridge L, et al. A prospective, controlled, randomized trial comparing early active extension with passive 
extension using a dynamic splint in the rehabilitation of repaired 
extensor tendons. J Hand Surg (Br). 2002; 27N(3):283- 288.                    
  
        
 
  
          
 
         
 
          
  
  
          
 
 
   
       
 
       
 
            
      
            
 
 
         
 
           
 
 
     
          
 
          
  
         
       
 
        
  
        Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 24 of 31 
13. Chow JA, Dovelle S, Thomes LJ, et al. A comparison of results of 
extensor tendon repair followed by early controlled mobilization 
versus static immobilization. J Hand Surg. 1989;14(1):18 -20. 
14. Chow JA, Thomes LJ, Dovelle S , et al. Controlled motion 
rehabilitation after ﬂexor tendon repair and grafting. J Bone Joint 
Surg. 1988;70(4):591 -595. 
15. Cohen EJ. Adjunctive therapy devices: Restoring ROM outside of 
the clinic. Phys Ther Magazine. 1995 Mar:10 -13. 
16. Crosby CA, Wehbe MA. Early protected motion after extensor 
tendon repair. J Hand Surg [Am]. 1999;24(5):1061 -1070. 
17. Dempsey AL, Mills T, Karsch RM, Branch TP. Maximizing total end range time is safe and eﬀective for the conservative treatment of 
frozen shoulder patients. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2011;90(9):738 ­
745. 
18. Doornberg JN, Ring D, Jupiter JB. Static progressive splinting for 
posttraumatic elbow stiﬀness. J Orthop Trauma. 2006;20(6):400 ­
404. 
19. ERMI, Inc. Insurance Provider Information Folder. Decatur, GA: 
ERMI; 2002. 
20. Evans PJ, Nandi S, Maschke S, et al. Prevention and treatment of 
elbow stiﬀness. J Hand Surg Am. 2009;34(4):769- 778. 
21. Farmer SE, Woollam PJ, Patrick JH, et al. Dynamic orthoses in the 
management of joint contracture. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 
2005;87(3):291 -295. 
22. Ferrari J. Hallux valgus deformity (bunion). UpToDate [online 
serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed February 2019. 
23. Furia JP, Willis FB, Shanmugam R, Curran SA. Systematic review of 
contracture reduction in the lower extremity with dynamic splinting. Adv Ther. 2013;30(8):763 -770. 
24. Gelinas JJ, Faber KJ, Patterson SD, King GJ. The eﬀectiveness of 
turnbuckle splinting for elbow contractures. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 
2000;82(1):74- 78. 
25. Germann G, Wagner H, Blome -Eberwein S, Karle B, Wittemann. 
Early dynamic motion versus postoperative immobilization in 
patients with extensor indicis proprius transfer to restore thumb 
extension: A prospective study. J Hand Surg. 2001;26A:1111­
1115. 
26. Goodyear -Smith F, Arroll B. What can family physicians oﬀer 
patients with carpal tunnel syndrome other than surgery? A 
systematic review of nonsurgical management. Ann Fam Med.                    
 
          
  
 
 
    
          
 
  
       
 
          
    
 
 
  
         
 
          
 
 
  
       
 
         
   
 
  
        
 
 
         
 
      
 
   
       
  
  
      Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 25 of 31 
2004;2(3):267- 273. 
27. Graham RG, Hudson DA, Solomons M, Singer M. A prospective 
study to assess the outcome of steroid injections and wrist 
splinting for the treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome. Plast 
Reconst r Surg. 2004;113(2):550- 556. 
28. Green DP, McCoy H. Turnbuckle orthotic correction of elbow ­
ﬂexion contractures after acute injuries. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
1979;61(7):1092 -1095. 
29. Greer MA, Miklos -Essenberg ME. Early mobilization using 
dynamic splinting with acute triceps tendon avulsion. J Hand 
Ther. 2005;18:365 -371. 
30. Halar EM, Bell KR. Contracture and other deleterious eﬀects of 
immobility. In: Rehabilitation Medicine: Principles and Practice. 
2nd ed. JA DeLisa, ed. Philadelphia, PA: J.B. Lippincott Co.; 1993; 
Ch. 33: 681- 699. 
31. Harvey L, Herbert R, Crosbie J. Does stretching induce lasting 
increases in joint ROM? A systematic review. Physiother Res Int. 
2002;7(1):1- 13. 
32. Hepburn GR, Crivelli KJ. Use of elbow Dynasplint for reduction of 
elbow ﬂexion contractures: A case study. J Ortho p Sports Phys 
Ther. 1984;5(5):269 -274. 
33. Hepburn GR. Case studies: Contracture and stiﬀ joint 
management with Dynasplint. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 
1987;8:498 -504. 
34. Hewitt B, Shakespeare D. Flexion vs. extension: A comparison of 
post -operative total knee arthroplasty mobilization regimes. 
Knee. 2001;8(4):305 -309. 
35. Hung LK, Chan A, Chang J, et al. Early controlled active 
mobilization with dynamic splintage for treatment of extensor 
tendon injuries. J Hand Surg [Am]. 1990;15 (2):251- 257. 
36. International Society for Oral Oncology (ISOO), Multinational 
Association of Supportive Care in Cancer (MASCC), Oral Cancer 
Study Group. Evidence -Based Management Strategies for Oral 
Complication from Cancer Treatment. Hillerød, Denmark:
 
MASCC; 2011.
 
37. Jansen CM, Windau JE, Bonutti PM, et al. Treatment of a knee contracture using a knee orthosis incorporating stress- relaxation 
techniques. Phys Ther. 1996;76(2):182- 186. 
38. John MM, Kalish S, Perns SV, Willis FB. Dynamic splint ing for 
postoperative hallux limitus: A randomized, controlled trial. J Am                    
    
        
    
 
  
 
       
  
 
   
            
 
   
  
           
 
   
        
  
       
 
      
 
         
  
       
 
  
        
 
       
         
 
        
  
         
 
             Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 26 of 31 
Podiatr Med Assoc. 2011;101(4):285- 288. 
39. Joint Active Systems, Inc. JAS OnLine [website]. Eﬃngham, IL: Joint 
Active Systems; 2002. Available at: 
http://www.jointactivesystems.com. Accessed September 11, 
2002. 
40. Joint Active Systems, Inc. Principles of static progressive stretch. JAS Professionals. Joint Active Systems: The Static Progressive 
Stretch Company [website]. Eﬃngham, IL: Joint Active Systems; 
2008. Available at: 
http://www.jointactivesystems.com/pf_principles.html. Accessed 
May 29, 2008. 
41. Kerr CD, Burczak JR. Dynamic traction after extensor tendon repair in zone 6, 7, and 8: A retrospective study. J Hand Surg [Br]. 
1989;14(1):21- 25. 
42. Khandwala AR, Webb J, Harris B, et al. A comparison of dynamic 
extension splinting and controlled active mobilization of 
complete divisions of extensor tendons in zones 5 and 6. J Hand 
Surg [Br]. 2000;25(2):140 -146. 
43. Kitis A, Ozcan RH, Bag datli D, et al. Comparison of static and 
dynamic splinting regimens for extensor tendon repairs in zones 
V to VII. J Plast Surg Hand Surg. 2012;46(3 -4):267 -271. 
44. Larson D, Jerosch -Herold C. Clinical eﬀectiveness of post ­
operative splinting after surgical r elease of Dupuytren's 
contracture: A systematic review. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 
2008;9:104. 
45. Lindenhovius AL, Doornberg JN, Brouwer KM, et al. A prospective 
randomized controlled trial of dynamic versus static progressive elbow splinting for posttraumatic elbow stiﬀness. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am. 2012;94(8):694 -700. 
46. Lucado AM, Li Z. Static progressive splinting to improve wrist stiﬀness after distal radius fracture: A prospective, case series 
study. Physiother Theory Pract. 2009;25:297- 309. 
47. Mackay -Lyons M. Low -load, prolonged stretch in treatment of 
elbow ﬂexion contractures secondary to head trauma: A case 
report. Phys Ther. 1989;69(4):292- 296. 
48. May EJ, Silfverskiold KL, Sollerman CJ. The correlation between 
controlled range of motion with dy namic traction and results 
after ﬂexor tendon repair in zone II. J Hand Surg [Am]. 1992;17 
(6):1133 -1139. 
49. McClure PW, Blackburn LG, Dusold C. The use of splints in the                    
         
     
 
         
 
    
         
 
        
 
 
           
 
 
           
       
 
           
   
 
           
   
 
    
         
 
            
       
         
 
   
        
 
          
  
 
            
          Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 27 of 31 
treatment of joint stiﬀness: Biologic rationale and an algorithm 
for making clinical decisions. Phys Ther. 1994;74(12):1101- 1107. 
50. McGrath MS, Bonutti PM, Marker DR, et al. Static progressive 
splinting for restoration of rotational motion of the forearm. J 
Hand Ther. 2009;22(1):3 -9. 
51. McGrath MS, Ulrich SD, Bonutti PM, et al. Evaluation of static 
progressive stretch for the treatment of wrist stiﬀness. J Hand 
Surg Am. 2008;33(9):1498- 1504. 
52. Michlovitz SL, Harris BA, Watkins MP. Therapy interventions for 
improving joint range of motion: A systematic review. J Hand 
Ther. 2004;17(2):118 -131. 
53. Mills PB, Finlayson H, Sudol M, O'Connor R. Systematic review of 
adjunct therapies to improve outcomes following botulinum toxin injection for treatment of limb spasticity. Clin Rehabil. 
2016;30(6):537 -548. 
54. Mowlavi A, Burns M, Brown RE. Dynamic versus static splinting 
for simple zone V and zone VI extensor tendon rep airs: A 
prospective, randomized, controlled study. Plast Recontr Surg. 
2005;115:482- 487. 
55. Neuhaus V, Wong G, Russo KE, Mudgal CS. Dynamic splinting 
with early motion following zone IV/V and TI to TIII extensor 
tendon repairs. J Hand Surg Am. 2012;37(5):933- 937. 
56. Papotto BA, Mills T. Treatment of severe ﬂexion deﬁcits following 
total knee arthroplasty: A randomized clinical trial. Orthop Nurs. 
2012;31(1):29- 34. 
57. Plaass C, Karch A, Koch A, et al. Short term results of dynamic splinting for hallux valgus - A prospective randomized study. Foot 
Ankle Surg. 2020;26(2):146 -150. 
58. Postans N, Wright P, Bromwich W, et al. The combined eﬀect of 
dynamic splinting and neuromuscular electrical stimulation in 
reducing wrist and elbow contractures in six children with
 
cerebral palsy. Prosthet Orthot Int. 2010;34(1):10- 19.
 
59. Richard RL, Jones LM, Miller SF, Finley RK Jr. Treatment of 
exposed bilateral Achilles tendons with use of the Dynasplint. 
Phys Ther. 1988;68(6):989- 991. 
60. Richard RL. Use of the Dynasplint to correct elbow ﬂexion burn 
contracture: A case report. J Burn Care Rehabil. 1986;7(2):151­152. 
61. Ring D, Hotchkiss RN, Guss D, Jupiter JB. Hinged elbow external 
ﬁxation for severe elbow contracture. J Bone Joint Surg Am.                    
 
  
       
          
  
   
         
 
  
        
 
          
 
  
            
         
 
   
 
           
 
 
  
       
           
  
  
        
  
        
        
  
          
  
        
 
  
        
  
 Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 28 of 31 
2005;87(6):1293- 1296. 
62. Rives K, Gelberman R, Smith B, Carney K. Severe contractures of 
the proximal interphalangeal joint in Dupuytren's disease: 
Results of a prospective trial of operative correction and dynamic 
extension splinting. J Hand Surg [Am]. 1992;17 (6):1153 -1159. 
63. Rose KJ, Burns J, Wheeler DM, North KN. Interventions for 
increasing ankle range of motion in patients with neuromuscular 
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(2):CD006973. 
64. Sackley C, Disler PB, Turner -Stokes L, et al. Rehabilitation 
interventions for foot drop in neuromuscular disease. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2009;(3):CD003908. 
65. Saldana MJ, Choban S, Westerbeck P, Schacherer TG. Results of 
acute zone III extensor tendon injuries treated with dynamic extension splinting. J Hand Surg [Am]. 1991;16 (6):1145 -1150. 
66. Saldana MJ, Chow JA, Gerbino P 2nd, et al. Further experience in 
rehabilitation of zone II ﬂexor tendon repair with dynamic traction splinting. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1991;87(3):543 -546. 
67. Sameem M, Wood T, Ignacy T, et al. A systematic review of rehabilitation protocols after surgical repair of the extensor 
tendons in zones V-VIII of the hand. J Hand Ther. 2011;24(4):365 ­
372. 
68. Sharma NK, Loudon JK. Static progressive stretch brace as a 
treatment of pain and functional limitati ons associated with 
plantar fasciitis: A pilot study. Foot Ankle Spec. 2010;3:117- 124. 
69. Sheridan L, Lopez A, Perez A, et al. Plantar fasciopathy treated 
with dynamic splinting: A randomized controlled trial. J Am 
Podiatr Med Assoc. 2010;100(3):161 -165. 
70. Shulman DH et al. Treating trismus with dynamic splinting: a 
cohort, case series. Adv Ther. 2008;25(1): 9 -16. 
71. Steﬀen TM, Mollinger LA. Low-load, prolonged stretch in the 
treatment of knee ﬂexion contractures in nursing home 
residents. Phys Ther. 1995;75(10):886- 897. 
72. Stephenson JJ, Quimbo RA, Gu T. Knee -attributable medical costs 
and risk of re -surgery among patients utilizing non -surgical 
treatment options for knee arthroﬁbrosis in a managed care population. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010;26(5):1109 -1118. 
73. Stubbleﬁeld MD et al. A preliminary report on the eﬃcacy of a dynamic jaw opening device (dynasplint trismus system) as part 
of the multimodal treatment of trismus in patients with head and 
neck cancer. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2010;91(8): 1278- 1282.                    
  
         
      
   
 
  
          
 
          
      
 
            
 
 
 
          
      
  
 
            
   
 
         
 
 
         Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 29 of 31 
74. Tan O, Atik B, Dogan A, et al. Postoperative dynamic extension 
splinting compared with ﬁxation with Kirschner wires and static 
splinting in contractures of burned hands: A comparative study 
of 57 cases in 9 years. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg Hand Surg. 
2007;41(4):197 -202. 
75. Thien TB, Becker JH, Theis J -C. Rehabilitation after surgery for 
ﬂexor tendon injuries in the hand. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2004;(4):CD003979. 
76. Uhl TL, Jacobs CA. Torque measures of common therapies for the 
treatment of ﬂexion contractures. J Arthroplasty. 2011;26(2):328­
334. 
77. Ulrich SD, Bonutti PM, Seyler TM, et al. Restoring range of motion 
via stress relaxation and static progressive stretch in 
posttraumatic elbow contractures. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 2010;19(2):196 -201. 
78. Veltman ES, Doornberg JN, Eygendaal D, et al. Static progressive 
versus dynamic splinting for posttraumatic elbow stiﬀness: A 
systematic review of 232 patients. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 
2015;135(5):613 -617. 
79. Verdugo RJ, Salinas RS, Castillo J, Cea JG. Surgical versus non­
surgical treatment for carpal tunnel syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(3):CD001552. 
80. Washington State Department of Labor and Industries, Oﬃce of the Medical Director. ERMI Flexionators and Extensionators. Health Technology Assessment Brief. Olympia, WA: Washington 
State Department of Labor and Industries; updated June 6, 2003.                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 30 of 31 
Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights  reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist  in administering plan benefits and  
constitute neither offers of  coverage nor  medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only  a partial, general description of plan or  
program  benefits and does  not  constitute a contract.  Aetna does not  provide health care services and, therefore,  cannot  guarantee any  
results  or  outcomes.  Participating  providers  are  independent  contractors  in private  practice  and  are  neither employees  nor  agents  of Aetna  
or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for  medical advice and treatment  of members.  This Clinical Polic y  Bulletin may be  
updated  and  therefore  is  subject  to  change.  
Copyright © 2001- 2022 Aetna Inc.                    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Mechanical Stretching Devices for Contracture and Joint Stiffness -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 31 of 31 
AETNA BETTER HEALTH® OF PENNSYLVANIA 
Amendment  to  
Aetna  Clinical  Policy  Bulletin  Number:  0405 Mechanical  Stretching  
Devices for  Contracture and Joint Stiffness  
There are no amendments for Medicaid. 
revised 06/17/2022 