Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  1 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 Adjustable Cranial 
Orthoses for Positional 
Plagiocephaly and 
Craniosynostoses *  
 
Medical Policy #:  01.01.05    
Original Effective  Date: August 2000       
Reviewed:  March 202 2 
Revised:  May 2022  
 
 
NOTICE: This policy contains information which is clinical in nature. The policy is not medical 
advice. The information in this policy is used by Wellmark to make determinations whether medical 
treatment is covered under the terms of a Wellmark member ’s health benefit plan. Physicians  and 
other health care providers are responsible for medical advice and treatment. If you have specific 
health care needs, you should consult an appropriate health care professional. If you would like to 
request an accessible version of this document, plea se contact customer service at 800 -524-9242.  
 
Benefit determinations are based on the applicable contract language in effect at the time the services 
were rendered. Exclusions, limitations,  or exceptions may apply. Benefits may vary based on 
contract, and individual member benefits must be verified. Wellmark determines medical necessity 
only if the benefit exists and no contract exclusions are applicable. This medical policy may not apply 
to FEP. Benefits are determined by the Federal Employee Program.  
 
This Medical Policy document describes the status of medical technology at the time the document 
was developed. Since that time, new technology may have emerged,  or new medical literature may 
have been published. This Medical Policy will be reviewed regularly  and be updated as scientific and 
medical literature becomes available;  therefore , policies are subject to change without notice.  
 
DESCRIPTION  
 
Note:  This medical policy does not address the following: protective helmet (HCPCS 
code s A8000 –A8004 ) or (HCPCS codes L0112 or L0113) cranial cervical orthosis  for 
the treatment of torticollis, see Policy Guideline section below for additional information 
related to these orthoses.  
 
Cranial orthoses involve an adjustable helmet or band that progressively molds the shape 
of the infant cranium by applying corrective forces to prominences while leaving room 
for growth in the adjacent flattened areas. A cranial orthotic device may be used to treat 
postsurgical synostosis or positional plagiocepha ly in pediatric patients.  
 
Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  2 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 The skull consists of several plates of bone that are separated by sutures. As a child 
grows and develops, the sutures close, forming a solid piece of bone called the cranium. 
Sometimes the bones fuse incorrectly, resulting in cr anial asymmetry; however, 
abnormalities in head shape (i.e., cranial asymmetry) may develop due to a variety of 
factors. Plagiocephaly is generally defined as  cranial asymmetry and can be subdivided 
into two types: synostotic and nonsynostotic.  
 
Synostotic  Plagiocephaly   
In synostotic plagiocephaly  or craniosynostosis , premature fusing of one or more sutures 
in a child's cranium restricts skull and brain growth. This may cause increased pressure 
inside the head and/or cause the cranial or facial bones to be asymmetrical.  The type and 
degree of craniofacial deformity depends on the type of synostosis. The most common is 
scaphocephaly, a narrowed and elongated head resulting from synostosis of the sagittal 
suture. Trigonocephaly, in contrast, is premature fu sion of the metopic suture and results 
in a triangular shape of the forehead. Unilateral synostosis of the coronal suture results in 
an asymmetric distortion of the forehead called plagiocephaly, and fusion of both coronal 
sutures results in brachycephaly.  The diagnosis of synostotic plagiocephaly is made after 
a clinical evaluation and diagnostic testing. Surgery is typically the recommended 
treatment  involving the surgical remodeling of the cranial vault.  Cranial 
remolding  orthoses (helmets) may be used f or adjunctive postsurgical therapy. The goal 
of treatment is to reduce the pressure in the head and to correct the deformities of the face 
and skull bones. The ideal timing for this type of surgery is prior to 3 months of age. 
However, there is no upper ag e limit to surgery, and in some instances,  children may 
need minor surgical follow -up at 4 to 5 years of age.  
 
Nonsynostotic Plagiocephaly  
Nonsynostotic plagiocephaly,  also called positional or deformational plagiocephaly,  the 
sutures of the cranium remain open (usually up to 12 months of age).  The asymmetry can 
be secondary to various environmental factors including, but not limited to, premature 
birth, restrictive intrauterine environment, birth trauma,  torticollis, cervical 
anomalies,  and s leeping position.  
 
Positional plagiocephaly typically consists of right or left occipital flattening with 
advancement of the ipsilateral ear and ipsilateral frontal bone protrusion, resulting in 
visible facial asymmetry. Occipital flattening may be self -perpetuating, in that once it 
occurs it may be increasingly difficult for the infant to turn and sleep on the other 
side. Most of these deformities may auto -correct spontaneously  during the first few 
months of life after regular changes in sleeping position or following physical therapy 
aimed at correcting neck muscle imbalance. A cranial orthotic device is usually requested 
after a trial of repositioning fails to correct the asymmetry.   
 
Cranial Asymmetry  
An objective evaluation of cranial asymmetry may be based on anthropometric 
landmarks and/or the cephalic index. Anthropometric measurements of the cranial vault, 
cranial base, and orbitotragial depth help to identify asymmetries by evaluating the length Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  3 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 from one designated point on the face or cranium to a nother and comparing right and left 
sides. The degree of asymmetry also may be assessed by a comparison with normative 
values using the cephalic index. The cephalic index is the ratio of the maximum width of 
the cranium to its maximum length multiplied by 100. Additionally, the clinical 
evaluation of cranial asymmetry is useful to orthotists for fabricating cranial remolding 
orthoses (helmets) and in documenting treatment outcomes.  
 
Cranial Remolding Orthoses – Helmets  
A cranial remolding orthosis - helmet , sometimes referred to as a cranial band or dynamic 
orthotic cranioplasty (DOC), is a noninvasive custom -molded orthotic device that applies 
pressure to prominent regions of the cranium to progressively improve cranial  shape and 
symmetry. The custom -molded orthotic is designed  to be worn 23 hours a day with an 
hour off for exercise and skin care. The headband or helmet is initiated between three and 
18 months of age and is worn for an average of  two to four months.  Adju stments to the 
helmet need to be made every one to two weeks because a baby’s head grows very 
quickly. This involves adjusting the foam lining and/or portions of the outside plastic 
helmet.   
 
Cranial remolding bands and helmets are contraindicated in infants older than 24 months. 
The skull of these children has finished growing and no longer have the pliability and 
plasticity necessary to create a change in shape.  
 
Cranial Orthoses for S ynosto tic Plagiocephaly (Craniosynostosis ) 
 
Clinical Context and Therapy Purpose  
The purpose of postoperative cranial orthosis is to provide a treatment option that is an 
alternative to or an improvement on existing therapies, such as cranial vault remodeling 
without a cranial orthosis, in patients with open or endoscopic surgery for 
craniosynostosis.  
 
Populations  
The relevant population of interest is individuals with open or endoscopic surgery for 
craniosynostosis.  
 
Interventions  
The therapy  being considered is postoperative cranial orthosis.  
 
Comparators  
Comparators of interest include cranial vault remodeling without a cranial orthosis. 
Treatments for craniosynostosis include surgeries such as strip sagittal craniectomy, 
frontal -orbital advanceme nt, and frontal -occipital reversal.  
 
Outcomes  
The general outcomes of interest are a change in disease status, morbid events, functional 
outcomes, quality of life (QOL), and treatment -related morbidity. The existing literature Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  4 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 evaluating postoperative cra nial orthosis as a treatment for open or endoscopic surgery 
for craniosynostosis has varying lengths of follow -up, ranging from 13 to 25 months. 
While studies described below all reported at least 1 outcome of interest, longer follow -
up was necessary to fu lly observe outcomes. Therefore, 12 to 24 months of follow -up is 
considered appropriate to demonstrate efficacy. Patients with open or endoscopic surgery 
for craniosynostosis are actively managed by neurosurgeons, plastic surgeons, and 
primary care provide rs in an inpatient clinical setting.  
 
Literature Review  
Early literature consisted of a few case series that described the use of cranial orthoses 
following either open or endoscopically assisted surgery for craniosynostosis , which 
included the following:   
• The orthoses improved Cephalic Index score (100 times the ratio of cranial 
biparietal diameter and occipitofrontal diameter) more than a similar type of 
surgery without an orthosis reported elsewhere.  
• The Cephalic Index score improved by 4 (range, 67 -71) from baseline to 1 year in 
studies using surgery alone but improved by 10 (range, 65 -75) with combined 
treatment (Cephalic Index normal range, 75 -90). 
• Anthropomorphic measurements at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after surgery showed 
continued impr ovement in symmetry in most patients.  
• The decision to discontinue therapy was based on the child reaching the 12 -month 
postoperative mark or 18 months of age. After the first year post surgery , patients 
were followed annually or biannually (range, 3 -135 months). The mean 
preoperative Cephalic Index score was 98. The postoperative Cephalic Index 
score (>1 year) was 83, a 15% decrease from baseline.  
 
Since these initial reports, literature updates have identified a larger series des cribing 
endoscopically assisted strip craniectomy and postoperative helmet therapy for 
craniosynostosis , which included the following:  
• Because head -shape correction occurs slowly after surgery, helmet therapy is as 
important as the surgery to remove the a bnormal suture.  
• Outcomes from endoscopically assisted versus open repair of sagittal 
craniosynostosis. The endoscopic procedure was offered starting in 2006 and has 
become the most commonly performed approach.  The 42 patients treated with 
open -vault recons truction had a mean age at surgery of 6.8 months and a mean 
follow -up of 25 months. Mean age of the 47 endoscopically treated patients at 
surgery was 3.6 months and a mean follow -up was 13 months. Of the 29 
endoscopically treated patients who completed hel met therapy, the mean duration 
for helmet therapy was 8.7 months.  
 
Summary of Evidence  
The evidence on the efficacy of cranial orthoses (remolding helmet or band) following 
endoscopically assisted or open cranial vault remodeling surgery for synostot ic 
plagiocephaly  (craniosynostosis ) is limited and includes only case series. In the 
postoperative period after craniosynostosis repair, the role of cranial orthoses is to Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  5 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 continue remodeling the skull after surgery. Functional impairments are related to 
craniosynostosis, including the pote ntial for increased intracranial pressure and the risk of 
harm from additional surgery when severe deformity has not been corrected. This indirect 
evidence  that cranial orthoses (remolding helmet or band) can facilitate remodeling, and 
the use of a cranial  orthosis is likely to improve outcomes after cranial vault remodeling 
for synostosis is considered sufficient to suggest an improvement in health outcomes with 
postsurgical use of cranial orthosis  (remolding helmet or band)  for synostotic 
plagiocephaly  (craniosynostosis ). 
 
Cranial  Orthoses for  Nonsynostotic Plagiocephaly  (Positional Plagiocephaly)  
 
Clinical Context and Therapy Purpose  
The purpose of cranial orthosis is to provide a treatment option that is an alternative to or 
an improvement on existing therapies, such as positioning therapy, in patients with 
positional plagiocephaly.  
 
Populations  
The relevant population of interest is individuals with positional plagiocephaly. Some 
increase in the prevalence of positional plagiocephaly may be re lated to the change in 
recommended sleep practice (back to sleep) to prevent sudden infant death syndrome.  
 
Interventions  
The therapy being considered is cranial orthosis. Custom -fitted cranial orthoses are 
designed to be worn 23 hours a day for several months.  
 
Comparators  
Comparators of interest include positioning therapy. Treatment for positional 
plagiocephaly includes head repositioning and helmet therapy. It is estimated that about 
two-thirds of plagiocephaly cases may auto -correct spontaneo usly after regular changes 
in sleeping position or following physical therapy aimed at correcting neck muscle 
imbalance. A cranial orthotic device is usually requested after a trial of repositioning fails 
to correct the asymmetry, or if the child is too im mobile for repositioning.  
 
Outcomes  
The general outcomes of interest are a change in disease status, morbid events, functional 
outcomes, quality of life, and treatment -related morbidity. Guideline -related systematic 
reviews reported a mean duration of cran ial orthotic as 4 - 6 months depending on the age 
of the patient with longer -term outcome assessments reported at 2 years. Patients with 
positional plagiocephaly are managed by neurologists, pediatricians and other primary 
care providers in an outpatient c linical setting.  
 
Literature Review  
Picart et. al. 2020, reported on the results of a retrospective systematic review of cranial 
helmet therapy for positional cranial deformation. The review included 2188 children 
with positional cranial deformation with a median age of 8 months 4 days. The endpoints Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  6 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 to determine the effectiveness of cranial helmet therapy included restoration of facial 
symmetry (successful treatment), requirement of posterior cranial remodeling (treatment 
failure), significant decrease of  the cranial index (successful treatment of brachycephaly), 
and significant decrease in cranial diagonals difference (CDD). Facial symmetry was 
considered restored when the left and right distances from the tragus to the lateral canthus 
and to the corner o f the mouth were equal. A total of 13.7% of children had facial 
symmetry at the beginning of treatment, and after helmet therapy the total improved to 
66.7% (p<0.01). Children with cranial indexes > 80% were diagnosed with 
brachycephaly. The cranial index prior to helmet therapy ranged from an average of 
103.5 ± 6%, and with therapy improved to 96.7 ± 7.2% (p<0.01). Children in the 
unilateral deformity subgroup had a mean CDD of 1.50 ± 0.54 cm and post therapy 
measurements improved to 0.72 ± 0.37. This revi ew was a single center, retrospective 
review that lacked a control group. A prospective multicenter study that follows children 
throughout their development into adolescence is needed to validate broader and more 
lasting applicability of these results.  
 
Kunz, et. al. in 2019, investigated the long -term outcomes of head orthosis therapy for 
deformational plagiocephaly in a prospective, longitudinal study. The researchers defined 
deformational plagiocephaly as a CVAI of more than 3.5%. A total of 63 infants  were 
divided into three groups: one group treated with a head orthosis (n=32), one group 
treated without a head orthosis (n=13), and one control group without visible head 
asymmetries and a CVAI ≤ 3.5% (n=18). After 3D -stereophotogrammetric imaging and 
consultation, the infants were allocated to the “treated” or “untreated” group depending 
on the parents’ decision. The treatment group had regular check -ups and readjustments 
every 4 -5 weeks until a satisfactory head shape was achieved. When the participants  were 
4 years old, they had a follow -up assessment and 3D scan. The researchers found that 
reduction in asymmetry for the treated group was significantly higher for the CVAI and 
posterior cranial asymmetry index (PCAI). The maximum opening of the mouth was  
similar between the two groups. The study was limited by a small sample size and single -
center location.  
 
Mackel et. al. in 2017,  explored whether cranial helmet therapy initiated before 6 months 
of age leads to reduced plagiocephaly. The authors retrospe ctively reviewed the records 
of 45 infants (age range 3 -11 months) who underwent cranial helmet therapy between 
2010 and 2015. A total of 21 subjects were < 6 months old at the start of helmet therapy. 
The CVAI was significantly smaller at the beginning an d end of therapy at < 6 months 
compared to subjects who began therapy after 6 months (7.4 ± 2.9 vs. 9.4 ± 2.1%, 
p=0.01; 4.5 ± 2.8 vs. 6.4 ± 2.3%, p=0.015). The reduction in CVAI did not significantly 
vary between groups. The researchers found that an incre ase in either initial CVAI or age 
at the initiation of treatment correlated with the final CVAI, but length of helmet wear did 
not correlate with final CVAI. The authors stated that “among infants who started helmet 
wear at 4 –8 months of age, those who beg an helmet wear at 6 –8 months achieved a 
similar cranial symmetry in comparison to patients who initiated helmet wear at 4 –5 
months.” The study was limited by retrospective design, small sample size, and single -
center location.  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  7 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
  
Han et. al. in 2017, studied  the relationship between the starting age of cranial orthotic 
therapy and effectiveness of treatment in infants with deformational plagiocephaly. The 
authors retrospectively analyzed the records of 310 infants who underwent cranial -
remolding -orthosis ther apy between 2010 and 2016. Subjects were categorized by 
severity of initial plagiocephaly (mild, moderate, and severe) and initiation age (3 months 
to 9 months). The mean CVAI was the greatest in the 3-month  group (10.4 to 3.5%) and 
shortest in the 9 - mont h group (9.8 to 5.7%). The mean CVAI was significantly lower for 
the 6–9-month  groups than the 3-month  group; however, there was not a significant 
change between the 3–5-month  groups. The mean CVAI improvement rate was highest in 
the 3-month  group (67.9%) and lowest in the 9-month  group (43.4%). The mean duration 
of cranial -remolding -orthosis therapy was shortest in the 3-month  group (124 days) and 
longest in the 8-month  group (222 days). The authors concluded that starting cranial -
remolding -orthosis therap y after 6 months is associated with a longer duration of 
treatment and decreased rates of CVAI improvement. They found that 5 months was the 
most optimal age to start treatment for deformational plagiocephaly. The study was 
limited by the retrospective des ign, uneven sample size for the different age groups, and 
lack of strict criteria for treatment termination.  
 
In 2016, the Congress of Neurological Surgeons commissioned a systematic review to 
inform a joint evidence -based guideline on the role of cranial molding orthosis therapy 
for patients with positional plagiocephaly.  The guideline was issued by a 
multidisciplinary task force that included clinical and methodological experts; all task 
force members were required to disclose potential conflicts of interest. The guideline was 
endorsed by the Joint Guidelines Committee of the American Association of 
Neurological Surgeons and the Congress of Neurological Surgeons and American 
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).  This systematic review concluded t here is a s ubstantive 
body of non -randomized evidence that demonstrates more significant and faster 
improvement of cranial shape in infants with positional plagiocephaly treated with a 
helmet as compared to conservative therapy, especially if the deformity is severe,  and 
provided that helmet therapy is applied during the appropriate period of infancy. Specific 
criteria regarding the measurement and quantification of deformity and the most 
appropriate time window in infancy for treatment of positional plagiocephaly wit h a 
helmet remain elusive. In general, infants with a more severe presenting deformity and 
infants who are helmeted early in infancy tend to have more significant correction (and 
even normalization) of head shape.  
 
Summary of Evidence  
For individuals who  have n onsynostotic plagiocephaly  (positional plagiocephaly) who 
receive a cranial orthos es (remolding helmet or band ), the overall, evidence on an 
association between positional plagiocephaly and health outcomes is limited. A 
systematic review completed i n 2016 by the Congress of Neurological Surgeons  
concluded t here is a substantive  body of non -randomized evidence that demonstrates 
more significant and faster improvement of cranial shape in infants with positional 
plagiocephaly treated with a helmet as compared to conservative therapy, especially if the Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  8 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 deformity is severe, and provi ded that helmet therapy is applied during the appropriate 
period of infancy.  Taking  into consideration the limited number of publications over the 
past decade and the low likelihood of development of high -level evidence from 
controlled studies, the scienti fic literature is limited in support of an effect of 
deformational plagiocephaly on functional health outcomes , however, t he evidence 
limitations are acknowledged. Medical organization guidelines have supported use of 
orthoses for positional plagiocephaly with criteria, the use of cranial orthoses will be 
considered medically necessary for certain conditions  (see Policy Criteria section below) . 
 
The use of adjustable cranial orthoses (remolding helmet or band) are contraindicated in 
infants older than 24 mo nths as the skull of these children has finished growing and no 
longer have the pliability and plasticity necessary to create a change in shape.  
 
Practice Guidelines and Position Statements  
 
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)  
In 2011, the American Academy of Pediatrics (A AP) revised its 2003 policy on the 
prevention and m anagement of positional skull deformity in infants. The AAP indicated 
that in most cases, the diagnosis and successful management of deformational 
plagiocephaly can be assu med by the pediatrician or primary health care clinician and 
that mechanical methods if performed early in life, may prevent further skull deformity 
and may reverse existing deformity. In most cases, improvement is seen over a 2 - to 3-
month period with rep ositioning and neck exercises, especially if these measures are 
instituted as soon as the condition is recognized. The AAP indicated that use of helmets 
and related devices seems to be beneficial primarily when there has been a lack of 
response to mechanic al adjustments and exercises, and the best response to helmets 
occurs in the age range of 4 to 12 months of age.  (This policy was retired in 2018)  
 
Congress of Neurological Surgeons   
In 2016, the Congress of Neurological Surgeons commissioned a systematic  review to 
inform a joint evidence -based guideline on the role of cranial molding orthosis therapy 
for patients with positional plagiocephaly.  The guideline was issued by a 
multidisciplinary task force that included clinical and methodological experts; all  task 
force members were required to disclose potential conflicts of interest. The guideline was 
endorsed by the Joint Guidelines Committee of the American Association of 
Neurological Surgeons and the Congress of Neurological Surgeons and American 
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).  
 
This guideline provided the following recommendations:  
1. Physical examination is recommended for diagnosis of plagiocephaly with 
imaging necessary only rarely (Level III)  
2. Physical therapy is recommended rather than positioning pillows (which cause a 
less safe sleeping environment), and more effective than repositioning education 
based on evidence from 1 Class -1 study.  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  9 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 3. Helmet therapy is recommended for infants with persistent moderate to severe 
plagiocephaly despite conservative therapy (Level II).  
4. Helmet therapy is recommended for infants presenting at an advanced age with 
moderate to severe plagiocephaly (Level II).  
These guidelines catalog the current state of the scientific literature regarding 
plagiocephaly, but also highlight the la ck of high -grade evidence to guide clinical 
practice.  
This systematic review concluded t here is a substantive  body of non -randomized 
evidence that demonstrates more significant and faster improvement of cranial shape in 
infants with positional plagiocephal y treated with a helmet as compared to conservative 
therapy, especially if the deformity is severe, and provided that helmet therapy is applied 
during the appropriate period of infancy. Specific criteria regarding the measurement and 
quantification of defo rmity and the most appropriate time window in infancy for 
treatment of positional plagiocephaly with a helmet remain elusive. In general, infants 
with a more severe presenting deformity and infants who are helmeted early in infancy 
tend to have more signif icant correction (and even normalization) of head shape.  
 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS)  
In 2019, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS)  stated the 
following: “Treatment for craniosynostosis generally consists of surgery to improve the 
symmetry and appearance of the head and to relieve pressure on the brain and the cranial 
nerves. For some children with less severe problems, cranial molds can reshape the skull 
to accommodate b rain growth and improve the appearance of the head. ” 
 
Regulatory Status  
Cranial orthoses are classified by the FDA as Class II devices. This classification requires 
special controls, including prescription use, biocompatibility testing, and labeling 
(cont raindications, warnings, precautions, adverse events, and instructions for physicians 
and parents). They are intended for medical purposes to apply pressure to prominent 
regions of an infant's cranium in order to improve cranial symmetry and/or shape in 
infants from 3 to 18 months of age, with moderate to severe nonsynostotic positional 
plagiocephaly, including infants with plagiocephalic -, brachycephalic -, and 
scaphocephalicshaped heads. The FDA has approved a large number of cranial orthoses.  
 
PRIOR APPROVAL  
 
Prior approval required . 
 
POLICY  
 
Note:  This medical policy does not address the following: protective helmet (HCPCS 
code s A8000 –A8004 ) or (HCPCS codes L0112 or L0113) cranial cervical orthosis  for Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  10 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 the treatment of torticollis, see Policy Guideline section below for additional information 
related to these orthoses.  
 
Cranial Orthos es (Remolding Helmet or Banding)  for S ynostotic Plagiocephaly 
(Craniosynostosis ) 
 
The use of adjustable cranial orthoses  (remolding helmet or band)  may be considered 
medically necessary  in the post -operative management of infants following endoscopic 
repair of craniosynostosis.  
 
The use of adjustable cranial orthoses ( remolding helmet or band) may be considered 
medically necessary as an adjunct to surgical treatment of synostotic skull d eformity  of 
infants .  
 
The use of adjustable cranial orthoses ( remolding helmet or band) is considered not 
medically necessary  when criteria above have not been met  because the available 
published peer -reviewed literature does not support their use in the treatment of other 
illness or injury.   
 
Cranial  Orthos es (Remolding Helmet or Banding)  for Nonsynostotic Plagiocephaly  
(Positional Plagiocephaly)  
 
The use of adjustable cranial orthoses ( remolding helmet or band) may be considered 
medically necessary  when a diagnosis of moderate to severe nonsynostotic 
plagiocephaly (positional plagiocephaly)  has been documented, and ALL  of the 
following criteria are met:  
• The infant is 3 to 18 months of age; and  
• The infant has not responded to a two-month  trial (8 -weeks) of home management 
with head repositioning  or other conservative therapies (i.e., physical therapy), 
unless such therapies are contraindicated or consider ed inappropriate due to other 
comorbidities; and  
• Moderate to severe c ranial asymmetry is documented by either of the following:  
▪ Moderate to severe plagiocephaly in ONE of the following anthropometric 
dimensions  (see Policy Guideline  below ):  
o Cranial vaul t 
o Cranial base  
o Orbito tragial depth; or  
▪ Cephalic index measurement at least two standard deviations above or 
below the mean for the appropriate gender and age (see Policy Guideline  
below ).   
 
Subsequent (Replacement)  Cranial  Orthos es (Remolding Helmet or Banding)  
A subsequent (replacement) adjustable cranial orthosis (remolding helmet or band) may 
be considered medically necessary  when ALL of the following criteria are met:  
• The medical necessity criteria outlined above is met; and  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  11 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 • The cranial a symmetry has not resolved or improved after two to four months 
(Compliance is considered: 23 hours a day with an hour off for exercise and skin 
care unless documentation supports contraindicated or considered inappropriate 
due to other comorbidities ); and  
• There is a change in the infant’s condition that requires a replacement adjustable 
cranial orthosis (remolding helmet or band)  (e.g., growth [outgrown ]) the initial 
orthoses, or haven’t developed midline head control, rolling , or sitting) . 
 
Note:  Under normal circumstances, a n infant’s weight may triple in size between birth 
and 9 months. This significant growth rate is reflected by a concomitant and prop ortional 
increase in cranial size that may result in an improperly fitting or ineffective cranial 
orthos es. 
 
The use of adjustable cranial orthoses (remolding helmet or band) is considered not 
medically necessary  when criteria above have not been met  becau se the available 
because the available published peer -reviewed literature does not support their use in the 
treatment of other illness or injury.   
 
The use of adjustable cranial orthoses ( remolding helmet or band) is considered not 
medically necessary  as they are contraindicated in infants older than 24 months as the 
skull of these children has finished growing and no longer have the pliability and 
plasticity necessary to create a change in shape.  
 
Policy Guidelines  
 
Notes:   
• A protective helmet (HCPCS code A8000 –A8004) is not a cranial remolding 
device. A protective helmet (HCPCS code A8000 –A8004)  is considered a  safety 
device worn to prevent injury to the head rather than a device needed for active 
treatment and is not managed by this  medical policy , refer to the members benefit 
document for coverage and limitations.  
• The following codes are not managed by this medical policy and prior approval is 
not applicable. The below codes would be utili zed when the individual needs 
treatment for congenital torticollis and coverage would be subject to the members 
applicable benefits, refer to the members benefit document for coverage and 
limitations :   
▪ L0112 cranial cervical orthosis, congenital torticollis type, with or 
without soft interface material, adjustable range of motion joint, custom 
fabricated (would be utilized if treating plagiocephaly and torticollis)  
▪ L0113 cranial cervical orthosis, torti collis type, with or without joint, 
with or without soft interface material, prefabricated includes fitting and 
adjustment (would be utilized for the treatment of torticollis only)  
 
 
 Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  12 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 Required Documentation  
The documentation requirements outlined below are used to assess whether the member 
meets the clinical criteria for coverage and does not guarantee coverage of the service 
requested, submit medical notes documenting ALL of the following:  
• Reason for orthotic  
• Diagnosis  
• Physical exam related to support the n eed of the orthotic; include neurological, 
circulatory, skin, and musculoskeletal examination that supports the request, as 
well as the presence or absence of torticollis  
• At least one of the following:  
▪ Cranial vault asymmetry index (CVAI)  
▪ Cephalic index (CI)  
▪ Transcranial diameter difference (TDD)  
▪ Cranial vault asymmetry (CVA)  
• Documentation of treatments tried, failed, contraindicated ; include the dates and 
reason for discontinuing, including:  
▪ Repositioning  
▪ Physical or occupational therapy  
• Orthotis t notes to include the following:  
▪ Equipment quotes  with billing codes  
▪ Reason for orthotic  
▪ Anthropometric Measurements  
• Physician treatment plan, including plan to treat torticollis with cranial orthosis.  
 
Replacement Requests  
• In addition to the above documentation, also provide the following for a 
replacement request:  
▪ Age of current orthotic  
▪ Reason for replacement  
▪ Adjustments/modifications  
 
 
ANTHROPOMETRIC DIMENSIONS  
 
 Comparative Cranial Landmarks  
Cranial Vault  Left frontozygomatic point (fz) to right euryon (eu) 
minus right frontozygomatic point (fz) to left euron 
(eu) 
Cranial Base  Subnasal point (sn) to left tragus (t) minus subnasal 
point (sn) to right tragus (t)  
Orbitotragial Depth  Left exocanthion point (ex) to left tragus (t) minus 
right exocanthion point (ex) to right tragus (t)  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  13 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
  
 
Moderate to severe plagiocephaly is defined as one of the following:  
Cranial base (sn – t): >= 6 mm difference between left and right measurements  
Cranial vault (fz – contralateral eu): >= 8 mm difference between left and right 
measurements  
Obitotragial depth (ex – t): >= 4 mm difference between left and right measurements  
 
CEPHALIC INDEX MEASUREMENT  
CEPHALIC 
INDEX:  Head width (eu — eu) x 100  
Head length (g — op)  
 
(Cephalic index equal to head width eu minus eu multiplied by 100 divided by head 
length g minus op ) 
 
Moderate to severe plagiocephaly is defined as a cephalic index two standard deviations 
above or below the mean. Infants with deformational scaphocephaly will have a lower 
cephalic index due to a very long and narrow skull deformity. Infants with deformational 
brachycephaly will have an increased cephalic index due to a very wide and short skull 
deformity.  
 
Gender  Age  -2SD -1SD Mean  +1SD  +2SD  
Male  16 days – 
6 months  63.7 68.7 73.7 78.7 83.7 
 6-12 
months  64.8 64.8 78 84.6 91.2 
Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  14 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 Female  16 days – 
6 months  63.9 63.9 73.3 78 82.7 
 6-12 
months  69.5 69.5 78.5 83 87.5 
 
Definitions  
 
Asymmetry of cranial base:  Asymmetry of the cranial base measured from the subnasal 
point (midline under the nose) to the tragus (the cartilaginous projection in front of the 
external auditory canal).  
 
Asymmetry of cranial vault:  The differenc e of the diagonal measurement from the 
frontozygomaticus point (identified by palpation of the suture line above the upper outer 
corner of the orbit) to the euryon, defined as the most lateral point on the head located in 
the parietal region. The two diago nals are measured 30 degrees clockwise and 
counterclockwise  from the mid -sagittal line.   
Asymmetry of orbitotragial depth : An asymmetry of the orbitotragial depth that is 
measured from the exocanthion (outer corner of the eye fissure where the eyelids meet ) to 
the tragus (the cartilaginous projection in front of the external auditory canal).  
 
Brachiocephaly : A condition characterized by a head shape that is symmetric and 
disproportionately wide, (width ÷ length x 100%) ≥ 81%. This may be caused by 
abnormal growth rates of the skull bone plates or  may be due to an infant being placed in 
the same position for prolonged periods of time. The latter is referred to as “positional 
brachycephaly.”  
 
Cranial base : Asymmetry of the cranial base is measured from the sub -nasal point 
(midline under the nose) to  the tragus (the cartilaginous projection in front of the external 
auditory canal . 
 
Cephalic index : Cephalic index (CI): The measurement of head width divided by head 
length then multiplied by one hundred and expressed as a percentage. CI is used to assess  
abnormal head shapes without asymmetry. The maximum width is measured between the 
most lateral points of the head located in the parietal region (also known as the euryon). 
The head length is measured from the most prominent point in the median sagittal p lane 
between the supraorbital ridges (also called the glabella) to the most prominent posterior 
point of the occiput (that is, the ophisthocranion). The cephalic index can then be 
compared to normative measures. (0 -3 months old: 75 -95%, 4 -6 months old: 74 -94%, 7 -
12 months old: 73 -93%, 13 -18 months old: 72 -92%).  
 
Cranial Vault Asymmetry  Index (CVAI) : The percentage difference between the 
oblique measurements taken from 30˚ from vertical, or the absolute value of the Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  15 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 difference in cranial diagonals divided by  the greater diagonal and multiplied by 100. 
(Abnormal: >3.5%).  
 
Cranioproportional Index of Plagiocephelometry : The ratio between the width 
(sinistra -dextra) and the length (anterior -posterior) of the skull multiplied by 100. This 
measurement provides the degree of brachycephalic component of deformation. (Mild 
90-94%, Moderate 95 -99%, Severe: ≥ 100%).  
Craniosynostosis:  A congenital deformity of the infant skull that occurs when the 
fibrous joints between the bones of the skull (called cranial sutures) close prematurely.  
Non-synostotic Plagiocephaly:  A condition where an infant’s head becomes deformed 
due to external forces. In non -synostotic plagiocephaly, the joints between the skull bone 
plates (sutures) remain open, allowing non -surgical cor rection. This condition is also 
known as positional plagiocephaly.  
Oblique Diameter Difference Index : The ratio between the longest cranial diagonal and 
the shortest cranial diagonal multiplied by 100. The diagonals are 40˚ from the anterior -
posterior line . This measurement provides the degree of plagiocephalic component of 
deformation. (Mild: 104 -107%, Moderate: 108 -111%, Severe: ≥ 112%).  
Orthotic Cranioplasty : A method to correct non -synostotic plagiocephaly through the 
wearing of a custom -fitted helmet o r head band which places constant gentle pressure on 
the infant’s head to assume a more natural skull shape.  
Plagiocephaly : Flattening of the skull on the back or one side of the head. Sagittal suture: 
Skull joint that separates the left and right halves o f the skull.  
 
Scaphocephaly:  A condition characterized by a head shape that is symmetric and 
disproportionately narrow. May be caused by abnormal growth rates of the skull bone 
plates or  may be due to an infant being placed in the same position for prolong ed periods 
of time.  
 
PROCEDURE CODES AND BILLING 
GUIDELINES  
 
To report provider services, use appropriate CPT* codes, Alpha Numeric (HCPCS level 
2) codes, Revenue codes, and/or ICD diagnos is codes.  
• S1040 Cranial molding orthosis, rigid, with soft interface material, custom 
fabricated, includes fitting and adjustments.  
 Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  16 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 SELECTED REFERENCES  
• Littlefield TR. Food and Drug Administration Regulation of Orthotic Cranioplasty. 
Cleft Palate -Craniofacial Journal, July 2001;38(4):337 -340. 
• Institute for Clini cal Systems Improvement Cranial  orthosis for deformational 
plagiocephaly. ICSI Technology Assessment Abstract #82; March 2004.  
• Laughlin J, Luerssen TG, Dias MS, Committee on Practice and Ambulatory 
Medicine Section on Neurological Surgery. Prevention and m anagement of 
positional skull deformities in infants. Pediatrics. 2011 Dec;128(6):1236 -41. 
• American Academy of Orthotists and Prosthetists (AAOP).  Standard deviation 
table for cephalic index.  
• Lee MC, et al. Three -dimensional analysis of cranial and facial  asymmetry after 
helmet therapy for positional plagiocephaly. Child Nerv Syst 2015 Jul;31(7):1113 -
20. 
• National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). 
Craniosynostosis InformationPage.2016  
• Klimo P Jr, Lingo PR, Baird LC, et al. Congress of Neurological Surgeons 
Systematic Review and Evidence -Based Guideline on the Management of Patients 
With Positional Plagiocephaly: The Role of Repositioning. Neurosurgery 2016; 
79:E627.  
• Tamber MS, Nikas D, Beier A, et al. The Role of Cranial Molding Orthosi s 
(Helmet) Therapy. 2016  
• Canadian Pediatric Society. Practice Point. Positional plagiocephaly. Oct 1, 1011: 
Reaffirmed Feb 1, 2016.  
• Cognitive Outcomes and Positional Plagiocephaly. Collett BR, Wallace ER, Kartin 
D, Cunningham ML, Speltz ML. Pediatrics. 2019 Jan 11. Pii: e20182373. Doi: 
10.1542/peds.2018 -2373. [Epub ahead of print].  
• Safiri S, Khazaei S, Ayubi E. J Plast Analysis of the  correlation between 
deformational plagiocephaly and neurodevelopment delay: Methodological 
issues.Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2018 Feb;71(2):264 -265. Doi: 
10.1016/j.bjps.2017.10.031. Epub 2017 Nov 28.  
• Ballardini E, Sisti M, Basaglia N, Benedetto M, Baldan A, Borgna -Pignatti C, 
Garani G. Prevalence and characteristics of positional plagiocephaly in healthy full -
term infants at 8 -12 weeks of life. Eur J Pediatr. 2018 Oct;177(10):1547 -1554. Doi: 
10.1007/s00431 -018-3212 -0. Epub 2018 Jul 20.  
• Kelly, K. M., Joganic, E. F., Beals, S. P., Riggs, J. A., McGuire, M. K., & 
Littlefield, T. R. (2018). Helmet Treatment of Infants With Deformational 
Brachycephaly. Global Pediatric Health.  
• Baird, L., Kilmo, P, et al. Congress of Neurological Surgeons Systematic Review 
and Evid ence-Based Guidelines on the Management of Patients with Positional 
Plagiocephaly: Neurosurgery: the  role of physical therapy. Neurosurgery . 2016 
Nov;79(5):E630 -E631 . 
• Dorphage, K. Beck -BroichsitterB. Et al. Therapy effects of head orthoses in 
positional pl agiocephaly. Journal of Cranio -maxillo -facial surgery. (2016).  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  17 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 • Holowka, M., Reisner, A., et al. Plagiocephaly severity scale to aid in clinical 
treatment recommendations. Journal of Craniofacial Surgery. 2017; Jan 30.  
• Lam, S., Pan, I., et al. Factors infl uencing outcomes in the treatment of positional 
plagiocephaly in infants: A 7-year experience. Journal of Neurosur Pediatrics. 
2017; Mar; 19(3) 282 -288).  
• UpToDate. Overview of craniosynostosis. Edward P. Buchanan M.D., Topic last 
updated May 4, 2021. Also available at https://www.uptodate.com  
• Picart T, Beuriat PA, Szathmari A, et al. Positional cranial deformation in children: 
A plea for the efficacy of the cranial helmet in children. Neurochirurgie. 2020; 
66(2):102 -109 
• Kunz F, Schweitzer T, Grobe S, et al. Head orthosis therapy in positional 
plagiocephaly: longitudinal 3D -investigation of long -term outcomes, compared 
with untreated infants and with a control group. Eur J Orthod. 2019; 41(1):29 -37. 
• Mackel CE, Bonnar M, Keeny H, et al. The role of age and initial deformation on 
final cranial asymmetry in infants with plagiocephaly treated with helmet therapy. 
Pediatr Neurosurg. 2017; 52(5):318 -322 
• Han MH, Kang JY, Han HY, et al. Relationship between starting age  of cranial -
remolding -orthosis therapy and effectiveness of treatment in children with 
deformational plagiocephaly. Childs Nerv Syst. 2017; 33(8):1349 -1356  
• Klimo P, Ling PR, Baird L, et, al. Congress of Neurological Surgeons systematic 
review and evidence -based guideline on the management of patients with positional 
plagiocephaly: the role of respositioning. Neurosurgery Volume 79, Issue 5 
November 2016 pages E627 -E629  
• National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). 
Craniosynostosis Informa tion Page. 2017; 
https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/All -Disorders/Craniosynostosis -
Information -Page . Last updated March 2019 . Assessed March 2022  
 
 
                 
POLICY HISTORY  
 
Date  Reason  Action  
May 2022  Interim Review  Policy Revised  
March 2022  Annual Review  Policy Revised  
March 2021  Annual Review  Policy Renewed  
January 2021  Interim Review  Policy Revised  
March 20 20 Annual Review  Policy Revised  
March 201 9 Annual Review  Policy Revised  
March 201 8 Annual Review  Policy Revised  
March 201 7 Annual Review  Policy Renewed  
March 2016  Annual Review  Policy Revised  
April 2015  Annual Review  Policy Renewed  
May 2014  Annual Review  Policy Revised  Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is an independent licensee of the  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Association.  18 
©  Wellmark,  Inc. 
 July 2013  Annual Review  Policy Renewed  
October 2012  Annual Review  Policy Renewed  
October 2011  Annual Review  Policy Renewed  
 
New information or technology that would be relevant for Wellmark to consider when 
this policy is next reviewed may be submitted to:  
 Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield  
 Medical Policy Analyst  
 PO Box 9232  
 Des Moines, IA 5030 6-9232   
 
*CPT® is a registered trademark of the American Medical Association.  