 
Page 1 of 6 
Clinical Policy: Aspirin/Dipyridamole (Aggrenox)   
Reference Number: CP.PMN.20 
Effective Date: 09.01.06  
Last Review Date: 02. 23 
Line of Business: HIM, Medicaid    
 
  
Revision Log  
See Important Reminder  at the end of this policy for important regulatory and legal 
information.  
 
Description  
Aspirin/dipyridamole (Aggrenox®) is a combination antiplatelet agent. 
 
FDA Approved Indication(s) 
Aggrenox is indicated to reduce the risk of stroke in patients who have had transient ischemia of 
the brain or completed ischemic stroke due to thrombosis.  
 
Policy/Criteria 
Provider must submit documentation (such as office chart notes, lab results or other clinical 
information) supporting that member has met all approval criteria.  
 
It is the policy of health plans affiliated with Centene Corporation® that Aggrenox is medically 
necessary  when the following criteria are met:  
 
I. Initial Approval Criteria  
A. Secondary Prevention of Stroke (must meet all) :  
1. Age ≥ 18 years; 
2. Medical history includes ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA); 
3. Failure of aspirin used as a single agent (e.g., stroke or TIA while on aspirin therapy); 
4. Member is not a candidate for clopidogrel therapy due to contraindications or 
clinically significant adverse effects/drug interactions; 
5. If request is for Aggrenox, member must use generic aspirin/dipyridamole, unless 
contraindicated or clinically significant adverse effects are experienced;  
6. Dose does not exceed both of the following (a and b):  
a. 50 mg aspirin/400 mg extended-release dipyridamole per day; 
b. 2 capsules per day.  
Approval duration: 12 months  
 
B. Other diagnoses/indications  (must meet 1 or 2) : 
1. If this drug has recently (within the last 6 months) undergone a label change (e.g., 
newly approved indication, age expansion, new dosing regimen) that is not yet 
reflected in this policy, refer to one of the following policies (a or b): 
a. For drugs on the formulary (commercial, health insurance marketplace) or PDL 
(Medicaid), the no coverage criteria policy for the relevant line of business: 
HIM.PA.33 for health insurance marketplace and CP.PMN.255 for Medicaid; or CLINICAL POLICY 
Aspirin/Dipyridamole 
 
Page 2 of 6 
b. For drugs NOT on the formulary (commercial, health insurance marketplace) or 
PDL (Medicaid), the non-formulary policy for the relevant line of business: 
HIM.PA.103 for health insurance marketplace and CP.PMN.16 for Medicaid; or 
2. If the requested use (e.g., diagnosis, age, dosing regimen) is NOT specifically listed 
under section III (Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized) AND 
criterion 1 above does not apply, refer to the off-label use policy for the relevant line 
of business: HIM.PA.154 for health insurance marketplace and CP.PMN.53 for 
Medicaid.  
 
II. Continued Therapy 
A. Secondary Prevention of Stroke (must meet all) :  
1. Member meets one of the following (a or b): 
a. Currently receiving medication via Centene benefit or member has previously met 
initial approval criteria; 
b. Member is currently receiving medication and is enrolled in a state and product 
with continuity of care regulations ( refer to state specific addendums for 
CC.PHARM.03A and CC.PHARM.03B);  
2. Member is responding positively to therapy; 
3. If request is for Aggrenox, member must use generic aspirin/dipyridamole, unless 
contraindicated or clinically significant adverse effects are experienced;  
4. If request is for a dose increase, new dose does not exceed both of the following (a 
and b):  
a. 50 mg aspirin/400 mg extended-release dipyridamole per day; 
b. 2 capsules per day.  
Approval duration: 12 months 
 
B. Other diagnoses/indications  (must meet 1 or 2) : 
1. If this drug has recently (within the last 6 months) undergone a label change (e.g., 
newly approved indication, age expansion, new dosing regimen) that is not yet 
reflected in this policy, refer to one of the following policies (a or b): 
a. For drugs on the formulary (commercial, health insurance marketplace) or PDL 
(Medicaid), the no coverage criteria policy for the relevant line of business: 
HIM.PA.33 for health insurance marketplace and CP.PMN.255 for Medicaid; or 
b. For drugs NOT on the formulary (commercial, health insurance marketplace) or 
PDL (Medicaid), the non-formulary policy for the relevant line of business: 
HIM.PA.103 for health insurance marketplace and CP.PMN.16 for Medicaid; or 
2. If the requested use (e.g., diagnosis, age, dosing regimen) is NOT specifically listed 
under section III (Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized) AND 
criterion 1 above does not apply, refer to the off-label use policy for the relevant line 
of business: HIM.PA.154 for health insurance marketplace and CP.PMN.53 for 
Medicaid.  
 
III. Diagnoses/Indications for which coverage is NOT authorized:  
A. Non-FDA approved indications, which are not addressed in this policy, unless there is 
sufficient documentation of efficacy and safety according to the off label use policies –CLINICAL POLICY 
Aspirin/Dipyridamole 
 
Page 3 of 6 
HIM.PA.154 for health insurance marketplace and CP.PMN.53 for Medicaid, or evidence 
of coverage documents.  
 
IV. Appendices/General Information 
Appendix A: Abbreviation/Acronym Key 
FDA: Food and Drug Administration 
TIA: transient ischemic attack 
 
Appendix B: Therapeutic Alternatives  
This table provides a listing of preferred alternative therapy recommended in the approval 
criteria. The drugs listed here may not be a formulary agent for all relevant lines of business 
and may require prior authorization.   
Drug Name  Dosing Regimen Dose Limit/ 
Maximum Dose 
aspirin 50-325 mg PO QD  325 mg/day  
clopidogrel (Plavix®) 75 mg PO QD  75 mg/day  
Therapeutic alternatives are listed as Brand name® (generic) when the drug is available by brand name only 
and generic (Brand name®) when the drug is available by both brand and generic. 
 
Appendix C: Contraindications/Boxed Warnings 
 Contraindication(s): 
o Hypersensitivity to any product ingredients  
o Patients with known allergy to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)  
o Patients with the syndrome of asthma, rhinitis, and nasal polyps  
 Boxed warning(s): none reported 
 
Appendix D: General Information 
 Aggrenox is not interchangeable with the individual components of aspirin and 
dipyridamole tablets. 
 
V. Dosage and Administration  
Indication Dosing Regimen Maximum Dose 
Secondary 
prevention of 
stroke 1 capsule PO BID (morning and evening)  
 
If there are intolerable headaches during initial 
treatment, switch to 1 capsule at bedtime and low-dose 
aspirin in the morning; resume twice daily dosing 
within 1 week  2 capsules/day 
 
VI. Product Availability   
Capsule: 25 mg aspirin/200 mg extended-release dipyridamole 
 CLINICAL POLICY 
Aspirin/Dipyridamole 
 
Page 4 of 6 
VII. References 
1. Aggrenox Prescribing Information. Ridgefield, CT: Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals 
Inc.; May 2021. Available at: https://docs.boehringer-
ingelheim.com/Prescribing%20Information/PIs/Aggrenox%20Caps/Aggrenox.pdf. Accessed 
October 7, 2022. 
2. Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, et al. Guidelines for prevention of stroke in patients 
with stroke and transient ischemic attack: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014; 45(7): 2160-2236.  
3. Lansberg MG, O’Donnell MJ, Khatri P et al. Antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy for 
ischemic stroke: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed.: American 
College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2012; 141(2 
Suppl): e601S-636S. 
4. Powers WJ, Rabinstein AA, Ackerson T, et al. 2018 guidelines for the early management of 
patients with acute ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2018;49:e46-e110. 
5. Warner JJ, Harrington RA, Sacco RL, et al. Guidelines for the early management of patients 
with acute ischemic stroke: 2019 update to the 2018 early management of patients with acute 
ischemic stroke. AHA/Stoke. 2019 Dec;50(12):3331-3332. 
 
Reviews, Revisions, and Approvals Date P&T 
Approval 
Date 
1Q 2019 annual review: no significant changes; references reviewed 
and updated.  10.30.18 02.19 
1Q 2020 annual review: no significant changes; references reviewed 
and updated.  11.09.19 02.20 
1Q 2021 annual review: added generic redirection language to initial 
and continuation criteria; references to HIM.PHAR.21 revised to 
HIM.PA.154; references reviewed and updated.  11.09.20 02.21 
1Q 2022 annual review: no significant changes; revised “Medical 
justification…” to “Member must use…”; references reviewed and 
updated. 11.23.21 02.22 
Template changes applied to other diagnoses/indications and 
continued therapy section.  09.20.22  
1Q 2023 annual review: no significant changes; references reviewed 
and updated.  10.07.22 02.23 
 
Important Reminder 
This clinical policy has been developed by appropriately experienced and licensed health care 
professionals based on a review and consideration of currently available generally accepted 
standards of medical practice; peer-reviewed medical literature; government agency/program 
approval status; evidence-based guidelines and positions of leading national health professional 
organizations; views of physicians practicing in relevant clinical areas affected by this clinical 
policy; and other available clinical information. The Health Plan makes no representations and 
accepts no liability with respect to the content of any external information used or relied upon in 
developing this clinical policy. This clinical policy is consistent with standards of medical CLINICAL POLICY 
Aspirin/Dipyridamole 
 
Page 5 of 6 
practice current at the time that this clinical policy was approved. “Health Plan” means a health 
plan that has adopted this clinical policy and that is operated or administered, in whole or in part, 
by Centene Management Company, LLC, or any of such health plan’s affiliates, as applicable. 
 
The purpose of this clinical policy is to provide a guide to medical necessity, which is a 
component of the guidelines used to assist in making coverage decisions and administering 
benefits. It does not constitute a contract or guarantee regarding payment or results. Coverage 
decisions and the administration of benefits are subject to all terms, conditions, exclusions and 
limitations of the coverage documents (e.g., evidence of coverage, certificate of coverage, policy, 
contract of insurance, etc.), as well as to state and federal requirements and applicable Health 
Plan-level administrative policies and procedures. 
 
This clinical policy is effective as of the date determined by the Health Plan. The date of posting 
may not be the effective date of this clinical policy. This clinical policy may be subject to 
applicable legal and regulatory requirements relating to provider notification. If there is a 
discrepancy between the effective date of this clinical policy and any applicable legal or 
regulatory requirement, the requirements of law and regulation shall govern. The Health Plan 
retains the right to change, amend or withdraw this clinical policy, and additional clinical 
policies may be developed and adopted as needed, at any time.  
 
This clinical policy does not constitute medical advice, medical treatment or medical care.  It is 
not intended to dictate to providers how to practice medicine. Providers are expected to exercise 
professional medical judgment in providing the most appropriate care, and are solely responsible 
for the medical advice and treatment of members.  This clinical policy is not intended to 
recommend treatment for members. Members should consult with their treating physician in 
connection with diagnosis and treatment decisions.  
 
Providers referred to in this clinical policy are independent contractors who exercise independent 
judgment and over whom the Health Plan has no control or right of control.  Providers are not 
agents or employees of the Health Plan. 
 
This clinical policy is the property of the Health Plan. Unauthorized copying, use, and 
distribution of this clinical policy or any information contained herein are strictly prohibited.  
Providers, members and their representatives are bound to the terms and conditions expressed 
herein through the terms of their contracts.  Where no such contract exists, providers, members 
and their representatives agree to be bound by such terms and conditions by providing services to 
members and/or submitting claims for payment for such services. 
 
Note:  
For Medicaid members , when state Medicaid coverage provisions conflict with the coverage 
provisions in this clinical policy, state Medicaid coverage provisions take precedence. Please 
refer to the state Medicaid manual for any coverage provisions pertaining to this clinical policy. 
 
©2006 Centene Corporation. All rights reserved.  All materials are exclusively owned by 
Centene Corporation and are protected by United States copyright law and international 
copyright law.  No part of this publication may be reproduced, copied, modified, distributed, CLINICAL POLICY 
Aspirin/Dipyridamole 
 
Page 6 of 6 
displayed, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted in any form or by any means, or otherwise 
published without the prior written permission of Centene Corporation. You may not alter or 
remove any trademark, copyright or other notice contained herein. Centene® and Centene 
Corporation® are registered trademarks exclusively owned by Centene Corporation. 