Page 1 of 5 
Cigna National Formulary Coverage Policy : PA Antiseizure Medications  - Epidiolex  Cigna National  Formulary Coverage Policy   
   
 
Effective Date  ................................ ...............  4/1/2023  
Next Review Date  ......................................... 4/1/2024  
Prior Authorization  
Antiseizure Medications  – Epidiolex® (cannabidiol oral solution)  
 
Table of Contents  
 
National Formulary Medical Necessity  ................ 1 
Conditions Not Covered ....................................... 2 
Background  .......................................................... 2 
References  .......................................................... 4 
Revision History  ................................ ...................  5 Product Identif ier(s)  
 
Effective 1/1/23 to 2/6/23: 61686  
Effective 2/7/23: 110619  
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE   
The following Coverage Policy applies to health benefit plans administered by Cigna Companies. Certain Cigna Companies and/or lines of 
business only provide utilization review services to clients and do not make coverage determinations. References to standard benefit plan 
language and coverage determinations do not apply to those clients. Coverage Policies are in tended to provide guidance in interpreting 
certain standard benefit plans administered by Cigna Companies. Please note, the terms of a customer’s particular benefit plan document 
[Group Service Agreement, Evidence of Coverage, Certificate of Coverage, Summ ary Plan Description (SPD) or similar plan document] may 
differ significantly from the standard benefit plans upon which these Coverage Policies are based. For example, a customer’s benefit plan 
document may contain a specific exclusion related to a topic addressed in a Coverage Policy. In the event of a conflict, a customer’s benefit 
plan document always supersedes the information in the Coverage Policies. In the absence of a controlling federal or state co verage 
mandate, benefits are ultimately determined by the terms of the applicable benefit plan document. Coverage determinations in each specific 
instance require consideration of 1) the terms of the applicable benefit plan document in effect on the date of service; 2) any applicable 
laws/regulations; 3) any relevant collateral source materials including Coverage Policies and; 4) the specific facts of the particular 
situation.  Coverage Policies relate exclusively to the administration of health benefit plans.  Coverage Policies are not recommendations for 
treatment  and should never be used as treatment guidelines. In certain markets, delegated vendor guidelines may be used to support 
medical necessity and other coverage determinations.  
National Formulary Medical Necessity 
 
Cigna covers cannabidiol  products (Epidiolex®) as medically necessary when the following criteria are 
met for FDA Indications or Other Uses with Supportive Evidence: 
 
Prior Authorization is recommended for prescription benefit coverage of Epidiolex.  All approvals are provided for 
the duration noted below.  Because of the specialized skills required for evaluation and diagnosis of individual s 
treated with Epidiolex as w ell as the monitoring required for adverse events and long- term efficacy, initial 
approval requires Epidiolex to be prescribed by or in consultation with a physician who specializes in the 
condition being treated.  
 FDA Indication(s)  
 
1. Dravet Syndrome.  Approve if the individual  meets ONE of the following criteria (A or  B): 
A) Initial Therapy .  Approve for 1 year if the individual  meets the following criteria (i, ii, and iii): 
i. Individual  is ≥ 1 year of age; AND  
ii. Individual  meets ONE of the f ollowing criteria (a or b): 
Page 2 of 5 
Cigna National Formulary Coverage Policy : PA Antiseizure Medications  - Epidiolex  a. Individual  has tried or is concomitantly receiving  at least two other antiseizure medications; 
OR 
Note:  Examples of other antiseizure medications include valproic acid, topiramate, 
clonaz epam, levetiracetam, zonisamide  
b. Individu al has tried or is concomitantly receiving  one of Fintepla, Diacomit or clobazam; AND  
iii. The medication is prescribed by or in consultation with a neurologist.  
B) Individual  is Currently Receiving Epidiolex .  Approve for 1 year if the individual  is responding to therapy 
(e.g., reduced seizure severity, frequency, and/or duration) as determined by the prescriber . 
 
2. Lennox -Gastaut Syndrome .  Approve if the individual  meets ONE of the following criteria (A or B): 
A) Initial Therapy .  Approve for 1 year if the individual  meets the following criteria (i, ii, and iii): 
i. Individual  is ≥ 1 year of age; AND  
ii. Individual  has tried or is concomitantly receiving at least two other antiseizure medications; AND  
Note:  Examples of other antiseizure medications include lamotrigine,  topiramate, Banzel, felbamate, 
clobazam, valproic acid, levetiracetam, zonisamide, Fycompa, vigabatrin.  
iii. The medication is prescribed by or in consultation with a neurologist.  
B) Individual  is Currently Receiving Epidiolex .  Approve for 1 year if the individual  is responding to therapy 
(e.g., reduced seizure severity, frequency, and/or duration) as determined by the prescriber . 
 
3. Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.   Approve if the individual meets ONE of the following criteria (A or B): 
A) Initial Therapy .  Approve for 1 year if the individual  meets the following criteria (i, ii, and iii): 
i. Individual  is ≥ 1 year of ag e; AND  
ii. Individual  has tried or is concomitantly receiving  at least two other antiseizure medications; AND  
Note:  Examples of other antiseizure medications include valproic acid, lamotrigine, topiramate, 
clonazepam, levetiracetam, zonisamide, Banzel, felbamate, clobazam, Fycompa, vigabatrin, 
everolimus.  
iii. The medication is prescribed by or in consultation with a neurologist.  
B) Individual  is Currently Receiving Epidiolex .  Approve for 1 year if the individual  is responding to therapy 
(e.g., reduced seizure severi ty, frequency, and/or duration) as determined by the prescriber . 
 
Other Uses with Supportive Evidence  
 
4. Treatment -Refractory Seizures/Epilepsy [specific rare conditions]  (i.e., CDKL5 deficiency disorder; 
Dup15q, Aicardi, or Doose syndromes; febrile infection ‐related epilepsy syndromes; Sturge‐ Weber 
syndrome; lissencephaly; cortical malformation/dysplasia; and epilepsy with myoclonic absences).  Approve 
if the individual  meets ONE of the following criteria (A or B): 
A) Initial Therapy .  Approve for 1 year if the individual  meets the following criteria (i, ii, and iii): 
i. Individual  is ≥ 1 year of age; AND  
ii. Individual  has tried or is concomitantly receiving  at least two other anti seizure medications; AND  
Note:  Examples of other antiseizure medications include valproic acid, lamotrigine, topiramate, 
clonazepam, levetiracetam, zonisamide, Banzel, felbamate, clobazam, Fycompa, vigabatrin.  
iii. The medication is prescribed by or in consult ation with a neurologist.  
B) Individual  is Currently Receiving Epidiolex .  Approve for 1 year if the individual  is responding to therapy 
(e.g., reduced seizure severity, frequency, and/or duration) as determined by the prescriber . 
 
Conditions Not Covered 
 
Cannabidiol (Epidiolex®) is considered experimental, investigational or unproven for ANY other use.  
 
Background 
 
Overview  
Epidiolex, a cannabinoid, is indicated in patients ≥ 1 year of age for the treatment of seizures  associated 
with:1 
• Dravet syndrome.  Page 3 of 5 
Cigna National Formulary Coverage Policy : PA Antiseizure Medications  - Epidiolex  • Lennox -Gastaut syndrome . 
• Tuberous sclerosis complex.  
 
Disease Overview  
Dravet syndrome is a rare genetic epileptic encephalopathy marked with frequent and/or prolonged seizures.2,3  
The seizures generally begin in the first year of life in an otherwise healthy infant.  Affected individuals can 
develop many seizure types:  myoclonic, tonic -clonic, absence, atypical absence, atonic, focal aware or impaired 
awareness (previously called partial seizures), and status epilepticus.3  Two or more antiseizure medications 
(ASMs) are often needed to control the seizures; most of the seizures are refractory to medications.  The goa ls 
of treatment are cessation of prolonged convulsions, reduction in overall seizure frequency, and minimization of 
treatment side effects.4,5 
 Lennox -Gastaut syndrome, a severe epileptic and developmental encephalopathy, is associated with a high rate 
of morbidity and mortality.
6,7  Lennox -Gastaut syndrome most often begins between 3 and 5 years of age.6-9  
Affected children experience several different types of seizures, most commonly atonic seizures (sudden loss of 
muscle tone and limpness) and tonic sei zures.6,9  The three main forms of treatment of Lennox -Gastaut 
syndrome are ASMs, dietary therapy (typically the ketogenic diet), and device/surgery (e.g., vagus nerve 
stimulation, corpus callostomy).9  None of the therapies are effective in all cases of Lennox -Gastaut syndrome 
and the disorder has proven particularly resistant to most therapeutic options.  
 Tuberous sclerosis complex is a rare, genetic disease that causes non- cancerous (benign) tumors to grow in the 
brain and on other vital organs such as t he kidneys, heart, eyes, lungs, and skin.
10  It can result in a combination 
of symptoms including seizures, impaired intellectual development, autism, behavioral problems, skin abnormalities, and kidney disease.  Seizures affect most individuals with tuber ous sclerosis complex at some 
point during their life and can be difficult to control.  
 Clinical Efficacy in Other Refractory Seizures  
In 2014, an expanded access program was initiated to provide Epidiolex to patients with treatment -resistant 
epilepsy.  Of  the 607 patients included in a published review, 174 patients were diagnosed with Dravet syndrome 
or Lennox -Gastaut syndrome, and 433 patients were diagnosed with other conditions, including CDKL5 
deficiency disorder, Dup15q, Aicardi, and Doose syndromes;  febrile infection‐ related epilepsy syndromes; 
tuberous sclerosis complex; Sturge‐ Weber syndrome; lissencephaly; cortical malformation/dysplasia; and 
myoclonic absence.
14  The patients enrolled in the study had severe, intractable, childhood- onset treatment -
resistant epilepsy and were on stable doses of ASMs for 4 weeks before starting Epidiolex as add- on therapy.  
The initial dose of Epidiolex was 2 to 10 mg/kg/day (taken as two divided doses) and gradually titrated until 
intolerance or to a maximum dose of 25 mg/kg/day or 50 mg/kg/day, depending upon treatment site.  After 12 
weeks of treatment, Epidiolex was associated with 51% and 48% reductions in median monthly convulsive and 
total seizures, respectively.  In a cohort of 132 patients (72 children, 60 adults) with treatment -resistant epilepsy, 
bi-weekly seizure frequency decreased from a mean of 144.4 at entry to 52.2 at 12 weeks (P = 0.01) and 
remained stable thereafter.15  Of note, patients with a diagnosis of Lennox -Gastaut syndrome or Dravet 
syndrome were initially excluded because of preferential enrollment into the randomized clinical trials; once 
these trials were closed for enrollment, patients with these syndromes were also enrolled.  In a separate cohort 
of patients with CDKL5 deficiency disorder and Aicardi, Doose, and Dup15q syndromes (n = 46), the percent 
change in median convulsive seizure frequency decreased from baseline to Week 12 by 51.4% and by 59.1% at Week 48.
16  There was a significant difference between the percent changes in monthly  convulsive seizure 
frequency during baseline and Week 12 (P = 0.00001), with no difference in seizure percent change between Weeks 12 and 48.  Of the 55 patients in the safety group, 27% of patients withdrew by Week 144 due to adverse effects (n = 4), lac k of efficacy (n = 9), withdrawn consent (n = 1), and lost to follow -up (n = 1).  
 Guidelines/Recommendations  
Dravet Syndrome  
At this time, there are three drugs approved for the treatment of seizures associated with Dravet syndrome:  Epidiolex, Diacomit
® (stiripentol capsules, powder for oral suspension), and Fintepla® (fenfluramine oral 
solution).1,11,17  An expert panel considers valproic acid and clobazam to be the first -line treatment for Dravet 
syndrome.4  If seizure control is suboptimal, Diacomit and topiramate are second- line treatment.  Ketogenic diet 
is moderately effective and can also be considered second- line.  The Dravet Foundation states that Diacomit, Page 4 of 5 
Cigna National Formulary Coverage Policy : PA Antiseizure Medications  - Epidiolex  Epidiolex, and Fintepla are considered first -line agents for the treatment of Dravet syndrome.2  If control is still 
inadequate, other therapies to consider are clonazepam, levetiracetam, and zonisamide.2,4  Sodium channel 
blockers (e.g., carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, and phenytoin) can worsen seizures in Dravet 
syndrome.  Additional ly, vigabatrin and tiagabine may increase the frequency of myoclonic seizures and should 
be avoided.  
 
Lennox -Gastaut Syndrome  
Currently, the FDA -approved drugs for this condition are Epidiolex, Fintepla, felbamate, Banzel® (rufinamide 
tablet, oral suspension), lamotrigine, topiramate, and clobazam.12  Despite the lack of level I or level II evidence, 
valproic acid remains a mainstay in treatment.8,9,13  If valproic acid does not provide adequate seizure control, 
which is al most always the case, lamotrigine should be added as the first adjunctive therapy.7  If the combination 
regimen of valproic acid and lamotrigine does not provide adequate control, then Banzel should be initiated and either valproic acid or lamotrigine should be discontinued.  If seizure control is still not achieved, the next adjunctive therapies to consider are topiramate, clobazam, and felbamate.  There is limited evidence for the use 
of levetiracetam, zonisamide, and Fycompa
® (perampanel tablet, oral sus pension).  Where possible, no more 
than two ASMs should be used concomitantly; use of multiple ASMs raise the risk of side effects and/or drug-
drug interactions.  
 
References  
 
1. Epidiolex® oral solution [prescribing information].  Carlsbad, CA:  Greenwich Biosciences; February 2022.  
2. Dravet Foundation –  Dravet Syndrome.  Available at:  https://www.dravetfoundation.org/what -is-dravet -
syndrome/ .  Accessed on February 13, 2023.  
3. Shafer PO.  Epilepsy Foundation – Dravet Syndrome.  Updated August 2020.  Available at:  
https://www.epilepsy.com/learn/types -epilepsy -syndromes/dravet -syndrome.  Accessed on February 13, 
2023.  
4. Wirrell EC, Laux L, Donner, et al.  Optimizing the diagnosis and management of Dravet syndrome:  
recommendations from a North American Consensus Panel.  Pediatr Neurol .  2017;68:18- 34. 
5. Knupp KG 1, Wirrell EC .  Treatment Strategies for Dravet Syndrome.  CNS Drugs .  2018;32(4):335- 350. 
6. Sirven JI, Shafer P O.  Epilepsy Foundation –  Lennox -Gastaut Syndrome.  Updated February 2020.  
Available at:  https://www.epilepsy.com/learn/types -epilepsy -syndromes/lennox -gastaut-syndrome- lgs.  
Accessed on February 13, 2023.  
7. Cross JH, Auvin S, Falip M, et al.  Expert opinion on the management of Lennox -Gastaut syndrome:  
treatment algorithms and practical considerations.  Front Neurol .  2017;8:505.  
8. Ostendorf AP, Ng YT.  Treatment -resistant Lennox -Gastaut syndrome:  therapeutic trends, challenges, and 
future directions.  Neuropsych Dis Treatment .  2017;13:1131- 1140.  
9. Wheless JW.  National Organization for Rare Diseases (NORD) –  Lennox -Gastaut syn drome.  Available at:  
https://rarediseases.org/rare- diseases/lennox -gastaut -syndrome/#standard- therapies .  Accessed o n 
February 13, 2023.  
10. National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.  Tuberous Sclerosis Fact Sheet.  Last updated:  
November 15, 2021.  Available at:  https://www.ninds.nih.gov/health- information/disorders/tuberous -
sclerosis- complex   .  Accessed  on February 13, 2023.  
11. Diacomit® capsules, powder for oral suspension [prescribing information].  Redwood City, CA:  Bicodex; July 
2022.  
12. Lennox -Gastaut Syndrome Foundation –  Lennox -Gastaut Syndrome.  Available at:  
https://www.lgsfoundation.org/about -lgs-2/what -is-lennox -gastaut -syndrome/.  Accessed on February 13, 
2023.  
13. Cherian KA.  Lennox -Gastaut syndrome treatment & management.  Updated August 2020.  Available at:  
https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1176735- treatment .  Accessed on February 13, 2023.  
14. Szaflarski JP, Bebin EM, Comi AM, et al.  Long‐ term safety and treatment effects of cannabidiol in children 
and adults with treatment ‐resistant epile psies:  Expanded access program results.  Epilepsia .  
2018;59(8):1540- 1548.  
15. Szaflarski JP, Bebin EM, Cutter G, et al.  Cannabidiol improves frequency and severity of seizures and reduces adverse events in an open- label add- on prospective study.  Epilepsy B ehav .  2018;87:131- 136. Page 5 of 5 
Cigna National Formulary Coverage Policy : PA Antiseizure Medications  - Epidiolex  16. Devinsky O, Verducci C, Thiele EA, et al.  Open- label use of highly purified CBD (Epidiolex®) in patients with 
CDKL5 deficiency disorder and Aicardi, Dup15q, and Doose syndromes.  Epilepsy Behav .  2018;86:131- 137. 
17. Fintepla® oral sol ution [prescribing information].  Emeryville CA:  Zogenix; January 2023.  
 
Revision History  
 
Type of 
Revision  Summary of Changes  Approval Date  
Annual Revision  The policy name was  changed from Antiepileptics – Epidiolex to Anti seizure 
Medications – Epidiolex.  
Throughout the criteria , reference to antiepileptic medications was changed to 
antiseizure medications.  02/15/2023  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 “Cigna Companies” refers to operating subsidiaries of Cigna Corporation. All products and services are provided exclusively b y or through 
such operating subsidiaries, including Cigna Health and Life Insurance Company, Connecticut General Life Insurance Com pany, Evernorth 
Behavioral Health, Inc., Cigna Health Management, Inc. and HMO or service company subsidiaries of Cigna Health Corporation. T he Cigna 
name, logo, and other Cigna marks are owned by Cigna Intellectual Property, Inc. © 2023  Cigna.  