 
 Medical Necessity Guidelines:  
Amyloidosis Therapies (Amvuttra 
(vutrisiran ) and Onpattro (patisiran )) 
 
                                             Amyloidosis Therapies (Amvuttra [vutrisiran] or Onpattro [patisiran])  
 1    
Effective: January 1, 2023  
 
Prior Authorization Required  
If REQUIRED , submit supporting clinical documentation pertinent to service request.  Yes ☒ No ☐ 
 
Applies  to: 
Commercial  Products  
☐ Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Commercial products ; Fax 617-673-0988  
☐ Tufts Health Plan Commercial products ; Fax 617-673-0988  
  CareLinkSM – Refer to CareLink Procedures, Services and Items Requiring Prior Authorization  
 
Public Plans Products  
☐ Tufts Health Direct – A Massachusetts Qualified Health Plan (QHP) (a commercial product) ; Fax 617-673-0988  
☐ Tufts Health Together – MassHealth MCO Plan and Accountable Care Partnership Plans ; Fax 617-673-0988  
☐ Tufts Health RITogether – A Rhode Island Medicaid Plan; Fax 617-673-0988  
☒ Tufts Health Unify * – OneCare Plan (a dual -eligible product) ; Fax 617-673-0956 
*The MNG applies to Tufts Health Unify members unless a less restrictive LCD or NCD exists.  
 
Senior Products  
☒ Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Stride Medicare Advantage;  Fax 617-673-0956 
☒ Tufts Health Plan Senior Care Options (SCO), (a dual -eligible  product) ; Fax 617-673-0956 
☒ Tufts Medicare Preferred HMO, (a Medicare Advantage product) ; Fax 617-673-0956 
☒ Tufts Medicare Preferred PPO , (a Medicare Advantage product) ; Fax 617-673-0956 
 
Note:  While you may not be the provider responsible for obtaining prior authorization, as a condition of payment you will need 
to ensure that prior authorization has been obtained.  
 
Overview  
Amyloidosis is the general term used to refer to the extracellular tis sue deposition of highly ordered fibrils composed of low 
molecular weight subunits of a variety of proteins, many of which, in their native form, circulate as normal constituents of plasma. 
Amyloid deposits may result in a wide range of clinical manifestat ions depending upon their type, location, and amount. In the 
genesis of amyloid deposits, previously soluble precursor peptides undergo conformational changes that lead to the adoption of a 
predominantly antiparallel beta- pleated sheet configuration, allow ing them to stack as protofilaments in a twisted fibrillar 
configuration.   
Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (TTR amyloidosis; also, hATTR or ATTR) is a slowly progressive condition characterized b y 
the buildup of abnormal deposits of amyloid protein in the body's organs and tissues. TTR amyloidosis (also referred to as 
familial amyloid polyneuropathy [FAP]) is caused by mutations in the TTR gene.   
 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Approved Indications:  
• Amvuttra (vutrisiran ) is a transthyretin- directed small interfering RNA indicated for the treatment of the polyneuropathy of 
hereditary transthyretin -mediated amyloidosis in adults.  
• ONPATTRO® (patisiran) contains a transthyretin -directed small interfering RNA and is indicated for the treatment of the 
polyneuropathy of hereditary transthyretin- mediated amyloidosis in adults.  
 
Clinical Guideline Coverage Criteria    
  
                                                                                                                                           Amyloidosis Therapies (Amvuttra [vutrisiran] or Onpattro [patisiran])   
2     The Plan may authorize coverage of Amvuttra (vutrisiran) or Onpattro® (patisiran) when all of the following criteria are 
met:   
1. The Member is an adult with a documented diagnosis of hereditary transthyretin -mediated amyloidosis   
AND   
2. The Member is experiencing progressive peripheral sensory -motor polyneuropathy   
AND   
3. Prescribed by or in consultation with neurologist or a provider who specializes in amyloidosis   
 
Limitations  
• Any indications other than FDA -approved indications are considered experimental or investigational and will not be 
approved by the health plan 
 
Codes 
The following code(s) require prior authorization:  
 
Table 1: HCPCS Codes  
HCPCS  Codes  Description  
J0222  Injection , patisiran, 0.1 mg  
J0225  Injection, vutrisiran, 1 mg  
 References:  
1. Amvuttra (vutrisiran ) [package insert]. Cambridge, MA: Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; June 2022.  
2. Onpattro® (patisiran) [package insert]. Cambridge, MA: Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; May 2021. Accessed online May 13, 
2022 at https://www.alnylam.com/sites/default/files/pdfs/O NPATTRO -Prescribing- Information.pdf.  
3. United States Food and Drug Administration. Package Insert -ONPATTRO. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2021/210922s009lbl.pdf.  
4. Overview of amyloidosis. UpToDate. Wolters Kluwer. Last updated August 10, 2021. Accessed online May 16, 2022 at 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/overview -of-
amyloidosis?search=amyloidosis&source=search_result&selectedTitle=1~150&usage_type=default&display_rank=1.   
5. Local Coverage Determination (LCD): Drugs and Biologicals, Coverage of, for Label and Off -Label Uses (L33394). Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Published online November 7, 2019.    
 
Approval And Revision History 
September 13, 2022: Reviewed by Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee (P&T).  
September 21, 2022: Reviewed by the Medical Policy Approval Committee (MPAC).  
Subsequent endorsement date(s) and changes made:  
• December 22, 2022: Administrative update: Amvuttra code J0225 added, effective January 1, 2023  
 
Background, Product and Disclaimer Information 
Medical Necess ity Guidelines are developed to determine coverage for benefits and are published to provide a better 
understanding of the basis upon which coverage decisions are made. We make coverage decisions using these guidelines, along 
with the Member’s benefit document, and in coordination with the Member’s physician(s) on a case- by-case basis considering the 
individual Member's health care needs.  
Medical Necessity Guidelines are developed for selected therapeutic or diagnostic services found to be safe and proven effective 
in a limited, defined population of patients or clinical circumstances. They include concise clinical coverage criteria based on 
current literature review, consultation with practicing physicians in our service area who are medical experts in the particular field, 
FDA and other government agency policies, and standards adopted by national accreditation organizations. We revise and update 
Medical Necessity Guidelines annually, or more frequently if new evidence becomes available that suggests needed revisions.  
For self -insured plans, coverage may vary depending on the terms of the benefit document. If a discrepancy exists between a 
Medical Necessity Guideline and a self -insured Member’s benefit document, the provisions of the benefit document will govern. 
For Tufts Health Together (Medicaid), coverage may be available beyond these guidelines for pediatric members under age 21  
  
                                                                                                                                           Amyloidosis Therapies (Amvuttra [vutrisiran] or Onpattro [patisiran])   
3     under the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) benefits of the plan in accordance with 130 CMR 
450.140 and 130 CMR 447.000, and with prior authorization.  
Treating providers are solely responsible for the medical advice and treatment of Members. The use of this guideline is not a  
guarantee of payment or a final prediction of how specific claim(s) will be adjudicated. Claims payment is subject to eligibility and 
benefits on the date of service, coordination of benefits, referral/authorization, utilization management guidelines when applicable, 
and adherence to plan policies, plan procedures, and claims edi ting logic.  