   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
    
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
       
 
     
  
      
 
 
   
 
 
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder  - Medical Clinical Policy  Bulletins |  Aetna  Page 1 of 39 
Premenstrual Syndrome and 
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder 
POLICY HISTORY 
Last Review: 07/13/2021 
Effective: 08/03/2001 
Next Review: 05/12/2022 
Review Histor y 
Definitions 
Additional Information  
Clinical Policy Bulletin 
Notes Number: 0512 
POLICY 
*Please see amendment for Pennsylvania Medicaid at the end of this CPB. 
I.  Diagnosis and  treatment  
Aetna  considers  the  following  services  and  procedures  medically  
necessary  for  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  pre- menstrual 
  
syndrome  (PMS)  and  pre- menstrual  dysphoric  disorder  (PMDD). 
  
Medic ally Necessary Procedures/Services : 
A. Assessment : 
Gynecological consultation 
Medical evaluation (complete medical history and physical 
examination) 
 
Psychiatric/psychological consultation and testing if the 
member exhibits mental/nervous symptoms 
 
Thyroid function tests (e.g., thyroid stimulating hormone, 
thyroxine). 
 
B. Treatment :         
 
 
 
      
         
       
 
 
 
  
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 2 of 39 
Bilateral  oophorectomy  for  members  with  severe  symptoms 
when all  medical therapy  has either failed or produced 
unacceptable side  effects  
Diuretics* such as chlorothiazide (  Diuril) and spironolactone 
(Aldactone) for members  with severe edema  
Gonadotropin -releasing  hormone  antagonists  such  as  danazol 
(Danocrine) for members  with  mastalgia  
Gonadotropin -releasing hormone agonists such  as Lupron 
(leuprolide acetate)  and goserelin (Zoladex) for  PMS and 
PMDD,  for  women  with  severe  refractory  disease  who  do  not  
respond to or are unable to tolerate selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and oral contraceptives  
Oral contraceptive pills* for women who have  failed other drug 
therapies and are  candidates for bilateral oophorectomy  
Selective  serotonin  re-uptake  inhibitors*  such  as fluoxetine 
(Prozac),  paroxetine (Paxil)  and sertraline  (Zoloft).  
*  
:  Medically necessary self -administered prescription  
medications are usually covered under  pharmacy benefit  plans.  
Coverage  of  particular  drugs  within  each  class  may  be  subjected  to 
formulary restrictions, where  applicable.  
II.  Experimental  services  
Aetna considers thefollowing services/procedures experimental 
and investigational for the diagnosis and treatment of PMS and 
PMDD because of insuﬃcient evidence in the peer-reviewed 
literature. 
Ineligible  Procedures/Services :  
A. Assessment : 
Evaluation  of cortisol  awakening response 
Laboratory  tests  to  detect  specific  nutrient  deficiencies  
Measurement of plasma  leptin  
Measurement of plasma progesterone  
Measurement of  reproductive hormones  
Measurement of salivary or serum cortisol          
        
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
  Measurement of serum magnesium 
Measurement of serum trace  elements  
Neuroimaging  
Pap smears with maturation index  
Sympa thetic skin response for the evaluation of peripheral 
sudomotor function Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 3 of 39 
B. Treatment : 
Acupuncture 
  
Allopregnanolone antagonists  (e.g.,  sepranolone)  
 
Alprazolam  (Xanax)  and other  benzodiazepine anxiolytics  
 
Anti-conv ulsants (e.g., levetiracetam) 
 
Acetazolamide (Diamox)  
 
Aromatherapy  
 
Bromocriptine (Parlodel) 
  
Clonidi ne (Catapres) 
 
Dietary  supplements  such as  evening primrose oil  and 
magnesium  
Duloxetine (Cymbalta)  Endom etrial  
ablation (see  
CPB  0091 - Endometrial  Ablation (../1_99/0091.html))  
Human chorionic  gonadotr opin injection Hysterectomy  
Intravenous  magnes ium  
Light  therapy  
Non-benzodiazepine anxiolytics  such as  buspirone (BuSpar)  
Non-contraceptive estrogen -containing preparations  
Progesterone (oral  or  vaginal  suppositories)  (see  
CPB  0510 - Progestins  (0510.html))  
Progestin -releasing intra -uterine system  (e.g.,  levonorgestrel ­ 
releasing intrauterine system)  
Reflexology  
Vestibular stimulation 
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine)  
Vitamin E (tocopherol).         
 
 
 
  
          
   
   
   
            
        
             
 
  
   
   
  
   
   
           
             
 
   
          
   
         
   
   
           
     
   
           
    
    
 
        
 
   
  
 
  Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 4 of 39 
BACKGROUND 
Pre-menstrual syndrome (PMS) refers to a set of menstrually related , 
chronic, cyclical, physical and emotional symptoms occurring in the luteal 
phase (the second half) of the menstrual cycle. Symptoms of PMS 
include breast tenderness, fatigue, cramping, bloating, irritability, 
aggressiveness, depression, inability to concentrate, food cravings, 
lethargy, and libido change. Although the cause of PMS is still unclear, it 
is thought to involve reproductive hormones, neurotransmitters, and other 
brain processes. It is estimated that up to 40 % of women of reproductive 
age are affected by PMS, with severe impairment occurring in 
approximately 5 % of these women. Individuals in the latter group may 
suffer from pre -menstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), a more severe 
form of PMS. The key symptoms of PMDD are markedly depressed 
mood, marked anxiety, marked affective lability, and reduced interest in 
activities. In classic PMDD, symptoms occur regularly during the last 
week of the luteal phase in most menstrual cycles during the preceding 
12 months. Symptoms typica lly begin to disappear within several days of 
the onset of menses and are always absent in the week after menses. 
Fewer than 50 % of women complaining of PMS have the diagnosis 
confirmed by rigorous criteria. One study reported that most women who 
referred themselves to a PMS clinic met the diagnostic criteria for 
affective disorders, most commonly major depression or anxiety disorder 
(Keenan et al, 1992). Nutrient abnormalities such as deficiencies of 
manganese, magnesium, B vitamins, vitamin E and linoleic acid have 
been reported in women with PMS. Moreover, there are no specific tests 
to diagnose PMS --no laboratory tests to detect specific nutrient 
deficiencies have been demonstrated to be useful. Measurements of 
reproductive hormones have not been found to be of value in diagnosing 
PMS. There is very little information regarding the use of Pap smears 
with maturation index for the diagnosis of PMS. However, since thyroid 
dysfunction is common among women of reproductive age, thyroid 
function measures (e.g., thyroid stimulating hormone, thyroxine) may be 
useful. Gynecological consultation is appropriate to assess symptoms 
and to rule out related illnesses such as dysmenorrhea, postpartum 
status, polycystic ovary disease, and endometriosis. Psy chiatric and 
psychological consultation and testing are not necessary unless the 
patient exhibits mental/nervous symptoms. An accurate diagnosis of         
             
             
            
  
 
  
           
         
           
  
 
     
    
  
   
   
   
 
   
  
    
  
  
 
  
   
        
       
            
   
 
  
  
  
  
          
         Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 5 of 39 
PMS can only be made by confirming that symptoms are confined to the 
luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. This can be aided by daily symptom 
charting for at least 2 menstrual cycles (2 periods are studied because of 
variability between cycles). 
Ozisik and colleagues (2005) examined sympathetic skin response in 
women with PMS (a disorder known to have many autonomic symptoms) 
to ascertain if there was sudomotor sympathetic involvement. The study 
included 24 subjects with PMS and 20 healthy women (control group). 
The ages of the women were 22 to 34 years (mean of 25) for the PMS 
group and 23 to 34 years (mean of 25) for the control group. The 
sympathetic skin response was recorded from the palms, soles and 
genital regions by means of electrical stimuli to the median nerve at the 
wrist. The sympathetic skin response was recorded in t he follicular phase 
as well as the late luteal phase of menstruation. The follicular and late 
luteal phase sympathetic skin response of the 2 groups were compared. 
The amplitudes and latency values of the late luteal and follicular phase 
sympathetic skin response from the PMS group and the control group 
were statistically similar. No differences were found in the latency or 
amplitude of the sympathetic skin response obtained from the 3 regions 
of both groups. The results of this study indicated that at the very least 
there is no difference between women with PMS and control subjects 
regarding peripheral sudomotor functions. 
Management of patients with PMS/PMDD ranges from conservative 
approaches to medications, with surgery reserved for the most severe, 
refractory cases. Women with PMS without co-morbid conditions should 
be treated conservatively. Recommended first-line treatments include a 
diet low in salt, fat, caffeine, and sugar; restriction of alcohol and tobacco 
consumption; an aerobic exercise regimen; and stress reduction via 
changes in lifestyle. Women with PMDD or PMS, who have failed to 
adequately respond to 2 to 3 months of first -line treatments, may be 
prescribed medications. The most effective medications for PMS and 
PMDD are selective se rotonin reuptake inhibitors such as fluoxetine 
(Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft). Diuretics such as 
chlorothiazide (Diuril) and spironolactone (Aldactone) are useful for 
patients with severe edema. Gonadotropin -releasing hormone 
antagon ists such as danazol (Danocrine) can be considered for patients 
with mastalgia. Although randomized controlled studies have failed to         
         
   
    
    
          
 
  
 
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 6 of 39 
demonstrate the effectiveness of oral contraceptive pills in treating PMS, 
a small number of women reported improvement of PMDD while on oral 
contraceptive. Thus, it may be reasonable to consider oral contraceptive 
pills for women who have failed other drug therapies and are candidates 
for bilateral oophorectomy, a last resort for patients with severe symptoms 
when medical therapy has either failed or has produced unacceptable 
side effects. 
Several treatment options  are not generally recommended for the 
management  of patients  with PMS/PMDD:  (i) progesterone  (oral or  
vaginal suppositories),  (ii) vitamin B6  (pyridoxine) or  vitamin E  
(tocopherol),  (iii) dietary supplements such  as evening primrose oil or  
magnesium, (iv) bromocriptine (Parlodel),  (v) benzodiazepine  
anxiolytics such as alprazolam  (Xanax),  (vi) non -benzodiazepine 
anxiolytics such as buspirone  (BuSpar),  (vii)  gonadotropin -releasing  
hormone  agonists  such  as  Lupron  (leuprolide  acetate)  and  goserelin  
(Zoladex), (viii) hysterectomy, and (ix)  endometrial  ablation.  
In a randomized controlled study,  Bunevicius and colleagues (2005)  
examined the effects of  clonidine in comparison with active placebo on 
pre-menstrual  symptoms, mood scores and  norepinephrine (NE)  
concentration,  in women with PMDD.  A  total of  12 women with 
prospectively confirmed PMDD were randomly assigned  to oral 0.3 
mg/day  clonidine,  as  an  active  treatment,  or  10  mg/day  loratadine,  as  an 
active placebo, for 2 months each using a double -blind, cross -over  
design.  Norepinephrine  concentration,  pre-menstrual  symptoms  ratings  
and  mood  scales  were  measured  on  3  occasions:  (i)  at  pre- treatment,  
(ii) after  clonidine treatment, and (iii) after  placebo treatment.  All  
patients  were  free  of  current  psychiatric  co-morbidity  and  medication  use.  
There  were  no  significant  differences  between  clonidine  and  placebo  for 
mood scales or  pre-menstrual symptoms ratings,  although clonidine 
significantly suppressed NE concentration and pr  oduced more side 
effects in comparison with placebo.  These investigators  concluded that  
compared with an active placebo, clonidine demonstrated no beneficial  
changes  in  mood  and  pre-menstrual  symptoms  in  women  with  PMDD.          
 
   
   
 
 
 
             
   
  
   
   
         
  
    
   
           
  
              
    
           
           
   
 
           
            
               
          
  
  
  
 
   
              
     
  
   
    
    Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 7 of 39 
Khine and colleagues (2006) noted that conflicting data exist regarding 
the presence of magnesium (Mg) deficiency and the therapeutic 
effectiveness of Mg in patients with PMS or PMDD. In a randomized 
controlled trial, these researchers examined Mg retention and mood 
effects after intravenous Mg infusion in patients with PMDD. The 
percentage of Mg retention was determined using 24 -hour urinary Mg 
excretion and the total dose of Mg given intravenously. In subjects with (n 
= 17) and without (n = 14) prospectively diagnosed PMDD, several 
measurements of blood Mg and evaluations of mood were obtained 
before, immediately after, and the day following an intravenous Mg 
loading dose (0.1 mM/kg). A positive mood response was seen under 
open conditions; as open Mg infusion improved mood, subsequent PMDD 
patients (n = 10) were randomized in a double -blind, placebo -controlled, 
cross -over fashion. Patients (31.5 %) and control subjects (27.5 %) 
retained comparable mean percentages of Mg. Neither group differed in 
measures of mean Mg before, immediately after, or the day following Mg 
infusion. Although there was a time effect for all mood measures in the 
patient group (p < 0.01 for all), there was neither a treatment nor time-by­
treatment effect. The authors concluded that contrary to prior reports, 
they found no evidence of Mg deficiency in women with PMDD compared 
with control subjects. Furthermore, Mg was not superior to placebo in the 
mitigation of mood symptoms in women with PMDD. 
In a pilot study, Mazza and colleagues (2008) examined the effectiveness 
of duloxetine, a dual serotonin and NE reuptake inhibitor, in the treatment 
of PMDD. A total of 55 women were treated with a 60 mg/day dosage of 
duloxetine for 2 menstrual cycles. Responses were assessed at first and 
second treatment cycle. Outcome measures included a visual analog 
scale, the Zung Self -rating Scale for Depression, the Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale, the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale and the 
Clinical Global Impress ions Scale. Fifty patients completed the trial. All 
had significant improvement of depression and anxiety and response, 
defined as a 50 % decrease in daily symptom scores, occurred in 39 (78 
%) patients. The effects of active treatment were marked by the f irst 
active cycle of menstruation. The authors concluded that duloxetine 60 
mg/day was effective in reducing PMDD symptoms and generally well -
tolerated. Limitations of the study were open -label design and lack of 
placebo control. However, the results appe ared to be strong and         
   
    
 
 
   
  
    
   
   
   
    
    
      
  
    
   
  
    
    
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
    
          
     
        
           
  
  
           
    Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 8 of 39 
consistent across measures. Adverse events (e.g., insomnia, nausea, 
poor appetite) were low. The authors stated that further studies are 
needed to confirm these results. 
In a pilot, open -label study, Kayatekin and colle agues (2008) examined 
the safety and effectiveness of levetiracetam for the treatment of PMDD. 
A total of 123 potential patients were prospectively screened to enroll 7 
patients into the open -label treatment phase of the study. Pre -menstrual 
dysphoric disorder was diagnosed per DSM -IV-TR criteria and 2 
consecutive months of prospective ratings of Daily Record of Severity of 
Problems (DRSP). The Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(MINI) was used to exclude any co -morbid conditions. Levetiracetam w as 
started at 250 mg qhs at the end of the 1st week of the follicular phase. 
Dosage was gradually increased up to 1,500 mg bid as tolerated or 
clinically effective. The treatment phase lasted 4 months. Response to 
treatment was evaluated by Clinical Global Impression (CGI) and DRSP 
scores. Overall, 6 out of 7 patients experienced a considerable decrease 
in their DRSP scores with levetiracetam, starting from the 1st treatment 
cycle. One patient dropped out of the study due to lack of effectiveness 
after 1 cy cle. Medication was fairly well -tolerated. Improvements in food 
cravings and pre -menstrual headaches were also noted as unexpected 
benefits. The authors noted that anti -convulsant medications, specifically 
levetiracetam, could be effective in the treatment of PMDD. They stated 
that future double -blind, placebo controlled, randomized studies 
are needed and should include larger number of patients. 
In a pilot, single -blind, non -controlled, fixed -dose trial, Ramos and 
colleagues (2009) examined the effectiveness of duloxetine (a dual 
reuptake inhibitor of serotonin and NE) in the treatment for women with 
PMDD. After 2 cycles for diagnosis confirmation, including a single -blind 
placebo cycle, 20 women with PMDD were treated continuously for 3 
menstrua l cycles with 60 mg/day duloxetine. The primary measure of the 
efficacy of treatment with duloxetine was the significant reduction in pre­
menstrual symptoms demonstrated by the comparison between the mean 
DRSP scores at baseline to endpoint (p = 0.0002). Statistically significant 
symptom reduction was observed in the first treatment cycle and 
throughout all the treatment phase. Clinical response, defined as a 
reduction 50 % of baseline pre-menstrual symptoms, occurred in 65 % of 
subjects (intention -to-treat population). Significant improvements were         
  
  
          
        
 
  
     
 
 
  
 
 
  
           
  
 
   
    
  
    
    
  
 
   
    
  
    
   
   
  
    
   
 
               
         
          
   
        Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 9 of 39 
demonstrated by secondary measures, including reduction in self -rated 
functional impairment (p = 0.01) and improvement in quality of life (p = 
0.04). The main side-effects associated with duloxetine were dry mouth, 
nausea, drowsiness, insomnia, decreased appetite, decreased libido, and 
sweating. Duloxetine was effective and generally well -tolerated in the 
treatment of PMDD. Moreover, the authors concluded that f urther large -
scale, double -blind, placebo -controlled studies are needed to evaluate 
duloxetine as an additional treatment strategy for the management of 
PMDD. 
Deligiannidis and Freeman (2010) noted that complementary and 
alternative medicine (CAM) therapies are commonly practiced in the 
United States and are used more frequently among women than men. 
These investigators reviewed several CAM treatments for depressive 
disorders in women, with a focus on major depressive disorder across the 
reproductiv e life cycle. The CAM therapies selected for this review 
(namely S -adenosyl -L-methionine, omega -3 fatty acids, St John's wort 
[Hypericum], acupuncture, light therapy, and exercise) were based on 
their prevalence of use and the availability of randomized, p lacebo -
controlled data. The authors concluded that further investigation is 
needed to delineate the role of specific CAM therapies in PMS, PMDD, 
ante-partum and post -partum depression, lactation, as well as the 
menopausal transition. 
Kim et al (2011) eva luated the current evidence for acupuncture as a 
treatment for PMS. A total of 10 databases were searched electronically, 
and relevant reviews were searched by hand through June 2009. The 
review included RCTs of women with PMS; these RCTs compared 
acupunct ure with sham acupuncture, medication, or no treatment. Study 
outcomes were presented as mean differences (for continuous data) or 
risk ratios (RRs) (for dichotomous data) with a 95 % confidence interval 
(CI). The risk of bias was assessed using the assess ment tool from the 
Cochrane Handbook. A total of 10 RCTs were included in this review. 
The pooled results demonstrated that acupuncture is superior to all 
controls (8 trials, pooled RR 1.55, 95 % CI: 1.33 to 1.80, p < 0.00001). A 
meta -analysis comparing the effects of acupuncture with different doses 
of progestin and/or anxiolytics supported the use of acupuncture (4 trials, 
RR 1.49, 95 % CI: 1.27 to 1.74, p < 0.00001). In addition, acupuncture 
significantly improved symptoms when compared with sham acupu ncture         
     
   
   
       
        
          
  
    
 
    
   
   
 
   
   
        
            
 
    
         
     
   
            
  
          
   
     
  
   
  
 
        
   
    
   
  Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 10 of 39 
(2 trials, RR 5.99, 95 % CI: 2.84 to 12.66, p < 0.00001). No evidence of 
harm resulting from acupuncture emerged. Most of the included studies 
demonstrated a high -risk of bias in terms of random sequence 
generation, allocation concealment, and blinding. The authors concluded 
that although acupuncture seems promising for symptom improvement in 
women with PMS, important methodological flaws in the included studies 
weaken the evidence. They stated that considering the potential of 
acupuncture, further rigorous studies are needed. 
In a Cochrane review, Ford et al (2012) examined if progesterone has 
been found to be an effective treatment for all or some pre -menstrual 
symptoms and if adverse events associated with this treatment have 
been reported. These investigators searched the Cochrane Menstrual 
Disorders and Subfertility Group's Trials Register, the Cochrane Central 
Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, EMBASE and 
PsycINFO to February 2011. They contacted pharmaceutical companies 
for information about unpublished trials, for the first version of this review. 
They included randomized double -blind, placebo -controlled trials of 
progesterone on women with PMS diagnosed by at least 2 prospective 
cycles, without current psychiatric disorder. Two reviewers extracted data 
independently and decided which trials to include. From 17 studies, 
only 2 met inclusion criteria. Together they had 280 participants aged 
between 18 and 45 years. A total of 115 yielded analysable results. Both 
studies measured symptom severity using subjective scales. Differing in 
design, participants, dose of progesterone and how delivered, the studies 
could not be combined in meta -analysis. Adverse events which may or 
may not have been side effects of the treatment were described as mild. 
Both trials had defects. They intended to exclude women whose 
symptoms continued after their periods. When data from ineligible 
women were excluded from analysis in 1 trial, the other women were 
found to have benefited more from progesterone than placebo. The 
smaller study found no statistically significant difference between oral 
progesterone, vaginally absorbed progesterone and placebo, but reported 
outcomes incompletely. The authors concluded that th ese trials did not 
show that progesterone is an effective treatment for PMS nor that it is 
not. Neither trial distinguished a subgroup of women who benefited, nor 
examined claimed success with high doses.         
 
      
     
             
   
   
     
         
 
 
       
     
  
            
  
  
    
         
    
   
  
 
 
    
            
       
        
   
  
   
  
   
 
     
  
            
   
  Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 11 of 39 
Leminen et al (2012) examined the eff ect of hysterectomy or 
levonorgestrel -releasingintra -uterine system (LNG -IUS) onpre-menstrual 
symptoms in women treated for menorrhagia. A cohort of 236 women, 
aged 35 to 49 years (mean of 43 years) referred for menorrhagia between 
1994 and 1997 were included in this analysis. Women were not 
diagnosed with PMS. Women were randomized to treatment by 
hysterectomy (n = 117) or LNG -IUS (n = 119). Analyses were performed 
using the intention -to-treat and actual treatment principles . Women using 
estrogen therapy and women who underwent bilateral salpingo ­
oophorectomy were excluded from the analyses. Main outcome 
measures included the occurrence of pre-menstrual symptoms evaluated 
by questionnaires at baseline and at follow -up visits 6 and 12 months 
after the treatment and 5 years after the randomization. Pre -menstrual 
symptoms decreased significantly in both groups by 6 months (p ≤ 0.028) 
without significant differences between the groups, except that in the 
LNG -IUS g roup the decrease of breast tenderness was seen first by 12 
months (p = 0.048). Even though 42 % of the women assigned to 
treatment with LNG -IUS were hysterectomized during the follow -up 
period, the results of intention -to-treat and actual treatment analys es were 
comparable. The authors concluded that both hysterectomy and LNG ­
IUS seem to alleviate pre -menstrual symptoms of women treated for 
menorrhagia, while the effect of these treatments on PMS remains 
unsettled. 
Sani et al (2014) noted that the treatment of PMDD is far from 
satisfactory, as there is a high proportion of patients who do not respond 
to conventional treatment. The anti-diuretic sulfonamide, acetazolamide, 
inhibits carbonic anhydrase and potentiates GABAergic transmission; the 
latter is putatively involved in PMDD. These researchers therefore tried 
acetazolamide in a series of women with intractable PMDD. They 
described a series of 8 women diagnosed with DSM -IV-TR PMDD, 5 of 
whom had co -morbidity with a mood di sorder and 1 with an anxiety 
disorder, who were resistant to treatment and responded with symptom 
disappearance after being added -on 125 mg/day acetazolamide for 7 to 
10 days prior to menses each month. Patients were free from pre ­
menstrual symptoms at th e 12-month follow -up. The authors suggested 
that acetazolamide may be used to improve symptoms of PMDD in cases 
not responding to other treatments. These preliminary findings need to 
be validated by well -designed studies.         
 
        
   
  
   
 
        
    
 
 
         
     
     
    
  
           
       
           
    
  
  
    
          
  
 
  
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 12 of 39 
An UpToDate review o n “Treatment of premenstrual syndrome and 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder” (Casper and Yonkers, 2015) states that 
“In women with severe symptoms who have not responded to or cannot 
tolerate SSRIs or OCs, we suggest GnRH agonist with estrogen ­
progestin addback therapy. However, GnRH agonists should not be 
considered until the patient has first tried selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs; e.g., fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, and venlafaxine), 
and an OC with a shortened pill -free interval or continuous 
administration”. 
Sepede and colleagues (2016) reviewed the original articles pertaining to 
the treatment of PMDD in adult women free of any current or previous 
psychiatric co -morbidity. These investigators searched PubMed to 
identify published studies on PMDD, including RCTs, open -label trials, 
and case series or case reports involving adult women with no history of 
co-morbid mental conditions. The search was conducted in April 2015. 
These researchers found 55 studies that met their inclusion criteria, 49 of 
them focused on pharmacological/chemical agents and the remaining 6 
on non -pharmacological interventions. The authors concluded that based 
on the results of their qualitative synthesis, the best therapeutic option in 
the tre atment of adult PMDD patients free of other mental disorders are 
SSRI anti -depressants (especially paroxetine and fluoxetine) and low 
doses of oral estro -progestins. Other interventions (e.g., cognitive 
behavioral therapy, food supplements, herbal medicine s, and light 
therapy) showed promising effects, but other investigations are needed to 
confirm their effectiveness. 
Measurement of Salivary or Serum Cortisol 
Kiesner  and  Granger  (2016)  noted  that  although  decades  of  research  has  
examined the association between cortisol regulation and PMS/PMDD,  
no review exists to provide a general  set of  conclusions from the extant  
research. In the present review these investigators  summarized and 
interpreted research that  has tested for  associations  between 
PMS/PMDD  and  cortisol levels  and reactivity (n  = 38 original research  
articles).  Three  types  of  studies  were  examined:  (i)  correlational  studies,  
(ii) environmental -challenge  studies, and (iii) pharmacological - 
challenge  studies.  Overall,  there  was  very  little  evidence  that  women  with 
and  without  PMS/PMDD  demonstrate  systematic  and  predictable  mean ­         
          
  
   
    
  
   
         
  
 
    
 
 
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 13 of 39 
level differences in cortisol, or differences in cortisol response/reactivity to 
challenges. Methodological differences in sample size, the types of 
symptoms used for diagnosis (physical and psychological versus only 
affective), or the type of cortisol measure used (serum versus salivary), 
did not account for differences between studies that did and did not find 
significant effects. The authors concluded that caution is recommended 
before accepting the conclusion of null effects, and recommendations are 
made that more rigorous research be conducted, considering symptom -
specificity, within -person analyses, and multiple parameters of c ortisol 
regulation, before final conclusions are drawn. 
Non -Contraceptive Estrogen -Containing Preparations 
In a Cochrane review,  Naheed and colleagues (2017) examined the 
safety and effectiveness of  non-contraceptive  estrogen -containing 
(NCEC) preparations in the management of PMS.  On March 14, 2016,  
these investigators  searched the following databases:  the Cochrane  
Gynecology  and Fertility Group  (CGF) Specialized Register; Cochrane  
Central Register of Studies  (CRSO);  MEDLINE; Embase; PsycINFO; 
CINAHL;  ClinicalTrials.gov;  metaRegister  of  Controlled  trials  (mRCT);  and  
the  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  International  Clinical  Trials  Registry 
Platform  (ICTRP) Search Portal.  In addition,  they checked the reference  
lists of articles retrieved. These  researchers  included  published and 
unpublished randomized placebo or active controlled trials on the 
effectiveness of  the use of NCEC prepar ations in the  management  of  
PMS in women of reproductive age with PMS  diagnosed by at least  2 
prospective cycles without current psychiatric disorder.  Two review  
authors  independently selected studies, assessed risk  of  bias, extracted 
data  on  PMS  and  adver se  effects  and  entered  data  into  Review  Manager  
5 software.  Where possible, intention -to-treat or modified intention -to­ 
treat analysis was used.  Studies  were pooled using a fixed -effect  model,  
analyzing cross -over trials  as parallel trials.  Standardized m ean 
differences  (SMDs) with 95 %  CIs  were calculated for PMS scores. Risk  
ratios with 95  % CIs were calculated for  dichotomous  outcomes. The 
overall quality of the evidence was  assessed using the GRADE  working 
group  methods.  The  search  resulted  in  524  potentially  relevant  articles;  5 
eligible RCTs were identified (305  women).  Trials using oral tablets,  
transdermal patches and implants  were identified.  No trial used gels;  1 
small  cross -over  trial  (11  women,  effective  sample  size  22  women          
 
           
    
   
   
        
          Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 14 of 39 
considering  cross -over  trials)  compared  oral  luteal -phase  estrogen  versus  
placebo.  Data  were  very  low  quality  and  unsuitable  for  analysis,  but  study 
authors  reported  that  the  intervention  was  ineffective  and  might  aggravate 
the symptoms of PMS. T  hey  also reported that  there were no adverse 
events  (AEs);  3  studies  compared  continuous  estrogen  with  progestogen 
versus placebo (with or  without progestogen). These trials  were of  
reasonable quality, although with a high risk of attrition bias and an 
unclear  risk of  bias due to potential carry -over effects in 2  cross -over 
trials. Continuous estrogen had  a small -to-moderate positive effect on 
global  symptom  scores  (SMD  -0.34,  95  %  CI:  -0.59  to  -0.10,  p  =  0.005,  3 
RCTs,  158  women,  effective  sample  size  267  women,  I²  =  63  %,  very  low  
quality evidence).  The evidence  was  too imprecise to determine if the 
groups  differed  in  withdrawal  rates  due  to  AEs  (RR  0.64,  95  %  CI:  0.26  to  
1.58,  p  =  0.33,  3  RCTs,  196  women,  effective  sample  size  284  women,  I²  
= 0 %, very  low quality  evidence). Similarly, the  evidence was very  
imprecise  in  measures  of  specific  AEs,  with  large  uncertainties  around  the 
true value of  the RR. None of  the studies  reported on  long-term risks  
such  as  endometrial  cancer  or  breast  cancer.  One  study  compared  patch 
dosage  (100  versus  200  µg  estrogen,  with  progestogen  in  both  arms)  and 
had  a  high  risk  of  performance  bias,  detection  bias  and  attrition  bias.  The 
study  did not  find evidence that dosage affects global symptoms, but  
there  was  much  uncertainty  around  the  effect  estimate  (SMD  -1.55,  95  % 
CI:  -8.88  to  5.78,  p  =  0.68,  1  RCT,  98  women,  very  low  quality  evidence).  
The evidence on rates of  withdrawal  for  AEs  was too imprecise to draw  
any  conclusions (RR  0.70,  95 %  CI: 0.34 to 1.46, p = 0.3 4, 1 RCT,  107 
women, low -quality evidence).  However, it appeared that the 100 -µg 
dose might  be associated with a lower overall risk  of  AEs attributed to 
estrogen (RR 0.51, 95 %  Cl: 0.26 to 0.99, p =  0.05, 1  RCT,  107 women,  
very low quality  evidence)  with a large uncertainty around the effect  
estimate.  The  overall  quality  of  the  evidence  for  all  comparisons  was  very  
low,  mainly due to risk of  bias (specifically  attrition), imprecision,  and 
statistical and clinical  heterogeneity.  
The aut hors found very low quality evidence to support the effectiveness 
of continuous estrogen (transdermal patches or subcutaneous implants) 
plus progestogen, with a small -to-moderate effect size. They found very 
low quality evidence from a study based on 11 women t o suggest that 
luteal -phase oral unopposed estrogen is probably ineffective and possibly 
detrimental for controlling the symptoms of PMS. A comparison between         
         
            
   
   
          
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
   
 
    
  
  
 
 
   
  
   
    
     
         
    
       
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
         
            Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 15 of 39 
200-µg and 100 -µg doses of continuous estrogen was inconclusive with 
regard to effectiveness, but suggested that the lower dose was less likely 
to cause side effects. Uncertainty remains regarding safety, as the 
identified studies were too small to provide definite answers. Moreover, 
no included trial addressed adverse effects that might occur beyond the 
typical trial duration of 2 to 8 months. 
Vestibular Stimulation 
In an experimental study, Johny and colleagues (2017) examined the 
effectiveness of vestibular stimulation in the management of PMS. A total 
of 20 subjects of age d 18 to 30 years were recruited for this study. 
Conventional swing was used to administer vestibular stimulation. 
Variables were recorded before and after vestibular stimulation and 
compared. Depression and stress scores were significantly decreased 
after 2 months of intervention. Anxiety scores decreased followed by 
vestibular stimulation. However, it was no statistically significant. Serum 
cortisol levels significantly decreased after 2 months of intervention. 
WHOQOL -BREF -transformed scores were not significantly changed 
followed by the intervention. However, psychological domain score (T2) 
and social relationships domain score (T3) were increased followed by 
intervention. Systolic blood pressure was significantly decreased after 2 
months o f intervention. No significant change was observed in diastolic 
pressure and pulse rate. Pain score was significantly decreased after 2 
months of intervention. Mini mental status examination (MMSE) scores 
and spatial and verbal memory score were significan tly improved followed 
by intervention. The authors concluded that the findings of this study 
provided preliminary evidence for implementing vestibular stimulation for 
management of PMS as a non -pharmacological therapy. They 
recommended further well-controlled, detailed studies in this area with 
higher sample size. 
Measurement of Plasma Leptin 
Nicolau and colleagues (2017) noted that PMS is characterized by 
physical and psychological symptoms in the luteal phase. Leptin can 
influence PMS as it acts on the hypothalamic -pituitary -gonadal axis. 
These investigators evaluated data regarding the profile of plasma leptin 
in women with PMS. They performed a search of databases using both         
      
 
  
   
    
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
   
   
   
    
     
 
 
           
   
         
         
 
 
          
 
    
         
 
 
 
   
           
 
   Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 16 of 39 
descriptors. A total of 3 studies (n = 181) were identified; 2 of these 
studies found higher leptin levels in women with PMS. Conflicting results 
were found regarding the leptin levels in the luteal phase and the 
correlation between leptin, estradiol, and progesterone levels. The 
authors concluded that leptin could have a role in the pathophysiology of 
PMS and indicate degree of severity of PMS. Moreover, they stated that 
future studies on the role of leptin in PMS are needed 
Cognitive Behavioral therapy 
In a review on PMS and PMDD, Hofmeister and Bodde n (2016) stated 
that SSRIs are 1st -line treatments. They can be used continuously or 
only during the luteal phase. Oral contraceptives and calcium 
supplements may also be used. There is insufficient evidence to 
recommend treatment with vitamin D, herbal re medies, or acupuncture, 
but there are data to suggest benefit from cognitive behavior therapy 
(CBT). On the other hand, in a general overview on treatment strategies 
for PMDD (Andrade, 2016), CBT is not mentioned as a therapeutic 
option. 
In a RCT, Ussher and Perz (2017) examined the efficacy of couple -based 
CBT for premenstrual disorders (PMDs), in comparison to one -to-one 
CBT and a wait -list control. Triangulation of quantitative and qualitative 
outcome measures evaluated changes pre-post intervention. A total of 83 
women were randomly allocated across 3 conditions, with 63 completing 
post-intervention measures, a retention rate of 76 %. Repeated 
measures analysis of variance found a significant time by group 
interaction identifying that women in the 2 CBT conditions reported lower 
total premenstrual symptoms, emotional reactivity/mood, and 
premenstrual distress, in comparison to the wait list control. Significantly 
higher active behavioral coping post -intervention was found in the couple 
condition than in the one -to-one and wait -list control groups. Qualitative 
analysis provided insight into the subjective experience of PMDs and 
participation in the intervention study. Across groups, women reported 
increased awareness and understanding of premenstrual chan ge post -
intervention. A larger proportion of women in the CBT conditions reported 
reduction in intensity and frequency of negative premenstrual emotional 
reactivity, increased communication and help -seeking, increased 
understanding and acceptance of embodied change, and the         
 
      
   
  
 
       
 
         
          
 
         
 
            
          
   
         
  
    
           
  
    
           
 
  
   
 
 
   
  
           
    
  
  
         
 
    
          
        
         Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 17 of 39 
development of coping skills, post -intervention. Increased partner 
understanding and improved relationship post-intervention was reported 
by a greater proportion of participants in the CBT conditions, most 
markedly in the couple condition. The authors concluded that these 
findings suggested that one -to-one and couple CBT interventions can 
significantlyreducewomen's premenstrual symptomatologyand distress, 
and improve premenstrual coping. They stated that couple -based CBT 
interventions may have a greater positive impact upon behavioral coping 
and perceptions of relationship context and support suggesting that CBT 
should be available for women reporting moderate -severe PMDs, with 
couple -based CBT offering additional benefits to a one-to-one modality. 
The authors stated that his study had several drawbacks. First, the rate 
of attrition post-intervention resulted in a small sample size. Second, the 
absence of daily diary ratings throughout the study, which would have 
allowed for measurement of ongoing change. Third, while partners were 
included in the couple condition, no evaluation of the perspectives of 
partners across conditions was included. This would strengthen the 
design of future couple interventions for PMDs, allowing for evaluation of 
the impact of intervention on partners, and possible changes in their 
perspective on women’s PMDs. Lastly, the majority of women who took 
part in this study were in heterosexual relationships. However, the one ­
to-one intervention used in the study has been found to be efficacious 
with women who are single and in lesbian relationships in previous 
research, suggesting it has efficacy beyond women in a heterosexual 
couple. 
Reid and Soares (2018) stated that most ovulatory women experience 
premenstrual symptoms (PMS, molimina) that indicate impending 
menstruation and are of little clinical relevance because they do not affect 
quality of life (QOL). A few women, however, experience significant 
physical and/or psychological symptoms before menstruation that, if left 
untreated, would result in deterioration in functioning and relationships. 
The precise etiology remains elusive, although new theories are gaining 
support in pre -clinical and early clinical trials. Refined diagnostic criteria 
allow better discrimination of this condition from other psychiatric 
diagnoses and the selection of symptom appropriate therapies that afford 
relief for most women. Pharmacotherapies (particularly SNRIs) represent 
the 1st-line treatment for PMDD and severe, mood -related PMS.         
   
  
          
   
          
 
 
       
          
 
 
 
 
    
           
         
        
          
         
           
           
 
        
        
    
        
        
 
  
 
    
       
    
   
   
 
          Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 18 of 39 
Continuous combined oral contraceptives have limited evidence for 
usefulness in PMDD, whereas medical ovarian suppression is often 
recommended for patients who fail to respond or cannot tolerate 1st-line 
treatments (e.g., SSRIs). The use of CBT is promising, but it remains 
limited by sparse data and restricted access to trained professionals. 
Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Treatment of premenstrual 
syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder” (Casper and Yonkers, 
2018) does not mention cognitive behavioral therapy as a therapeutic 
option. 
Acupuncture 
Armour and colleagues (2018) stated that acupuncture has a history of 
traditional use in China for women's health conditions including PMS, but 
its effectiveness for this condition remains unclear. Ina Cochrane review, 
these investigators evaluated safety and effectiveness of acupuncture or 
acupressure for women with PMS or PMDD. The authors concluded that 
the limited available evidence suggested that acupuncture and 
acupressure may improve both physical and psychological symptoms of 
PMS when compared to a sham control. There was insufficient evidence 
to determine whether there was a difference between the groups in rates 
of AEs. There was no evidence comparing acupuncture or acupressure 
versus current International Society for Premenstrual Disorders (ISPMD) 
recommended treatments for PMS such as selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs). These researchers stated that further research is 
needed, using validated outcome measures for PMS, adequate blinding 
and suitable comparator groups reflecting current best practice. 
Plasma Progesterone and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder 
Di Florio and colleagues (2018) stated that the molecular mechanisms 
underpinning the progesterone -triggering mood symptoms in women with 
PMDD are unknown. Cell metabolism is a potential source of variability. 
Very little is known about the effect of progesterone sensitivity on the 
metabolome. These researchers characterized the effects of 
progesterone on the global metabolic profile and examined the 
differences between women with PMDD and controls. Plasma was 
obtained from 12 women with prospectively confirmed PMDD and 25         
    
 
         
  
   
         
          
   
 
   
           
    
        
         
   
  
 
   
 
 
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 19 of 39 
controls under 2 hormonal conditions: gonadal suppression induced by 
leuprolide acetate (3.75 mg IM monthly); and add -back phase with 
leuprolide and progesterone (200 mg twice- daily by vaginal suppository). 
The global metabolic profile was obtained using liquid and gas 
chromatography followed by mass spectrometry. Differences between 
groups and time-points were tested using repeated measures analysis of 
variance. The false discovery rate was calculated to account for multiple 
testing. Amino acids and their derivatives represented 78 % (28/36) of 
the known compounds that were found in significantly lower plasma 
concentrations after progesterone administration than during gonadal 
suppression. The concentration of tyrosine was nominally significantly 
decreased after progesterone add-back in controls, but not in cases (p = 
0.02). The authors concluded that plasma levels of some amino ac ids 
were decreased in response to progesterone. These researchers stated 
that albeit preliminary, evidence further suggested that progesterone has 
a different effect on the metabolic profiles of women with PMDD 
compared to controls. They stated that furthe r research is needed to 
replicate these findings in a larger sample and to identify the unknown 
compounds, especially those differentially expressed. 
Serum Magnesium and Premenstrual Syndrome 
Moslehi and  colleagues (2019) noted that a number  of  studies have  
examined the association between serum Mg and PMS in different  
population, but the findings  have been inconclusive. In a systematic  
review and meta -analysis,  these investigators reviewed available 
observational studies to elucidate the overall  relationship between Mg 
and  PMS. PubMed, Cochrane's  library, ScienceDirect,  Scopus, Google 
Scholar,  and  ISI  web  of  science  databases  were  searched  for  all  available 
literature until January 2019 for  studies  evaluating the association 
between  Mg  and  PMS.  The  Newcastle -Ottawa  Quality  Assessment  Scale 
was used to evaluate the quality of  observational studies.  A total of 13 
studies out  of 196 met our inclusion criteria and were included in this  
study.  There were no associations between  serum Mg and PMS  
(weighe d  mean  difference  [WMD]  - 0.04;   95 %  CI: - 0.14  to  0.06;  p =  0.46)   
during follicular or  serum/erythrocyte Mg (WMD  - 0.37;   95 %   CI:  - 1.01 to  
0.27;  p =  0.25)/(WMD   - 0.04;   95  %  CI:  - 0.10   to  0.03;  p  =  0.26)   and  during 
luteal  phase  except  for  the  sub-group  of  studies  done  outside  of  the  U.S. 
in  which  recent  association  became  significant  and  means  that  serum  Mg          
  
         
    
    
         
         
           
 
 
 
 
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 20 of 39 
was lower in PMS subjects. The authors concluded that although this 
study did not show any significant association between serum/erythrocyte 
Mg and PMS except for serum Mg in luteal phase in the sub -group of 
studies done outside of the U.S., heterogeneity between studies should 
be taken into accounts when interpreting these findings. Moreover, these 
researchers stated that additional well -designed clinical trials are needed 
to develop firm conclusions on the efficacy of Mg on PMS. 
Serum Trace Elements and Premenstrual syndrome 
Bahrami and colleagues  (2019)  noted that PMS, primary  dysmenorrhea  
(PD), and  irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)  are common complaints  in 
women of  reproductive age.  Trace element status may  be associated 
with  the  development  of  these  disorders  but  the  current  data  are  unclear.  
In a  cross -sectional study,  these researchers examined the r elationship 
between  serum  and  dietary  copper  and  zinc  with  some  common  physical 
and  psychosomatic conditions among young females.  This trial  
comprised 448 adolescent girls who were classified into 4 groups:  
individuals  with  PMS  (n =  67),  PD  (n =  161),   both  PMS  and  PD  (n =  146),   
and  normal   (n =  74);  IBS  was  diagnosed   according to the Rome III   
questionnaire.  Flame atomic absorption (Varian  AA240FS)  was used to  
measure serum zinc and copper.  Food  intake of  micronutrients was  
estimated using a 3 -day  dietary  record. There was a significant  
difference  in  the  frequency  of  IBS  across  the  4  corresponding  groups  as 
the percentage of  subjects. The prevalence of  IBS  was significantly  
higher  in the PD group [PMS (13.6  %), PD  (19.9 %), both PMS  and PD  
(17.4  %)  and normal (8.1 %);   p <  0.05].   There was   no  significant   
differences  between  the  mean  values  for  serum  and  dietary  intake  of  zinc  
and  copper   among 4   groups   (p >  0.05);   although,   the mean dietary   zinc  
intake was  significantly lower in  subjects  with IBS ( 6.7 ±   2.8 mg/day)   
versus   those   without   IBS  (7.9 ±   3.1 mg/   day,  p  =  0.032).   The authors   
concluded  that  girls  with  IBS  were  found  to  have  significantly  higher  rates 
of  gynecological symptoms,  including PD and PMS. The  lower  dietary  
intake of zinc in subjects  with IBS indicated a need for greater attention 
towards  dietary patterns in these individuals. The role of  serum trace 
elements  in  the  development  of  PMS  need  to  be  further  investigated.  
Reflexology         
    
           
  
 
   
 
        
              
   
        
   
         
   
  
   
   
 
         
 
   
    
  
        
   
  
   
   
    
   
         
   
     
     
   
      
           
                 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 21 of 39 
Ernst (2009) assessed the evidence on the effectiveness of reflexology 
for treating any medical condition. A total of 6 electronic databases were 
searched from their inception to February 2009 to identify all relevant 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs). No language restrictions were 
applied. Randomized controlled trials of reflexology delivered by trained 
reflexologists to patients with specific medical conditions were selected. 
Condition studied, study design and controls, primary outcome measures, 
follow -up, and main results were extracted. A total of 18 RCTs met all the 
inclusion criteria. These studies examined a range of conditions: 
anovulation, asthma, back pain, dementia, diabetes, cancer, foot edema 
in pregnancy, headache, irritable bowel syndrome, menopause, multiple 
sclerosis, the post -operative state and PMS. There were more than 1 
study for asthma, the post-operativ e state, cancer palliation and multiple 
sclerosis; 5 RCTs yielded positive results. Methodological quality was 
evaluated using the Jadad scale. The methodological quality was often 
poor, and sample sizes were generally low. Most higher -quality trials did 
not generate positive findings. The authors concluded that the best 
evidence available to date does not demonstrate convincingly that 
reflexology is an effective treatment for any medical condition. 
In a systematic review and meta -analysis, Hasanpour and colleagues 
(2019) examined the effect of reflexology on PMS. This study was 
conducted by searching in 8 electronic data -bases including PubMed, 
Embase, Cochrane Library, Web of Science, ProQuest, Scopus, Google 
Scholar, and SID until December 28, 2018. In this regard, interventional 
studies, which examined the impact of reflexology on women with PMS, 
were included. These studies were published during 1993 to 2018. The 
Cochrane Collaboration's Risk of Bias Tool was used to assess the 
quality of studies. Meta -analysis was performed by the help of CMA 2 
software. A total of 9 out of 407 studies remained after screening, and 
quantitative and quantitative analyses were performed on them. The total 
number of research samples was 475. The mean treatment time with 
reflexology was 40.55 mins per session that was performed in 6 to 10 
sessions of treatment in 66.67 % of studies. According to the meta -
analysis and based on the random effects model, the reflexology could 
decrease the severity of PMS in the intervention group compared to the 
control group (SMD = -2.717, 95 % CI: -3.722 to -1.712). Meta -
regression results indicated that the duration of intervention sessions (β = 
-0.1124, 95 % CI: -0.142 to -0.084, p < 0.001) had a significant impact         
 
        
      
  
           
 
 
          
 
     
   
             
   
  
  
 
             
  
  
          
          
  
            
            
   
  
 
  
       
 
 
  
      
  
   
    
   
 
               Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 22 of 39 
on the severity of PMS. Reflexology could also significantly affect 
somatic (SMD = -1.142, 95 % CI: -1.481 to -0.803) and psychological 
(SMD = -1.380, 95 % CI: -2.082 to -0.677) symptoms arising from 
PMS. The authors concluded th at in general, results of the present study 
indicated that the reflexology could relieve PMS symptoms, so that overall 
scores, somatic and psychological symptoms of PMS decreased by 
applying the reflexology intervention. Furthermore, an increase in the 
length of reflexology time in each session increased its efficiency. 
Reflexology can be used as an effective intervention in a patient care 
program by nurses and its efficiency can be enhanced by increasing 
intervention time in each reflexology treatment session. These 
researchers stated that a logical step towards the future clinical trials is to 
compare reflexology interventions with other complementary and 
alternative therapies in order to provide a systematic review and meta -
analysis study i n this regard. 
The authors stated that a drawback of this study was the low number of 
studies that directly measured and reported somatic symptoms as 
outcomes; thus, the performance of applied statistical tests was 
somewhat affected to examine the publication bias in the studies. 
Another drawback was the publication bias in studies that examined the 
impact of reflexology on overall score of PMS. In this regard, adjusted 
effect size was measured by applying the trim and fill method. Another 
drawback of this study was the poor and incomplete report of studies in 
study design and subjects’ age. In some studies, these investigators 
received more detailed information by emailing authors. 
Evaluation of Cortisol Awakening Response for the Diagnosi s of 
Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) / Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder 
(PMDD) 
Hou and colleagues (2019) stated that previous studies have revealed 
stress -induced dysregulationofhypothalamic -pituitary -adrenal (HPA) axis 
in women with PMS; however, the findings regarding the relationship 
between HPA axis dysregulation and PMS are mixed. Therefore, it is 
necessary to examine the basal activity of the HPA axis in women with 
PMS instead of only assessing a certain stressor. T hese researchers 
assessed the relationship between the cortisol awakening response 
(CAR) and PMS. A total of 32 women with PMS (mean age of 22.47 ±         
 
  
 
   
  
   
   
         
  
     
          
         
       
    
  
   
          
   
 
          
         
    
        
           Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 23 of 39 
2.20 years)   and 36 healthy   controls   (mean age   of  22.28 ±   2.43 years)   
were included in this  study.  Saliva samples  of subjects were collected 
successively at  0,  30,  45,  and 60 mins after awakening to assess CAR  
during each of 2 phases  of  the menstrual cycle (the mid -follicular phase 
and  the  late  luteal  phase).  The  findings  showed  a  significantly  attenuated  
CAR  in  women  with  PMS  compared  with  the  healthy  controls,  especially  
at  45 and 60 mins after  awakening,  regardless  of the menstrual cycle 
phases.  In  addition,  there  was  a  significant  negative  correlation  between  
PMS  severity  as  measured  by  PMS  scale  and  AUCi  (i.e.,  the  area  under  
the curve with respect to increase) in the mid -follicular phase. The 
authors  concluded  that  these  findings  suggested  that  an  attenuated  CAR 
activity profile  may be an important  risk factor  for  the development of  
PMS.  
Neuroimaging for the Diagnosis of PMS / PMDD 
Liu and associates (2019) noted that PMS is a menstrual cycle -related 
disorder. Although the precis e pathophysiology is not fully understood, it 
is increasingly believed that the central nervous system(CNS) plays a 
vital role in the development of PMS. These researchers examined 
specific functional connectivity between the thalamus and cerebral cortex. 
Resting -state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were 
obtained from 20 PMS patients and 21 healthy controls (HCs). Seed -
based functional connectivity between the thalamus and 6 cortical regions 
of interest, including the pre-frontal cortex (PFC), posterior parietal cortex, 
somatosensory cortex, motor cortex/supplementary motor area, temporal 
and occipital lobe, was adopted to identify specific thalamo -cortical 
connectivity in the 2 groups. Correlation analysis was then used to 
examine relationships between the neuroimaging findings and clinical 
symptoms. Activity in distinct cortical regions correlated with specific sub­
regions of the thalamus in the 2 groups. Comparison between groups 
exhibited decreased PFC -thalamic connectivity and incre ased posterior 
parietal -thalamic connectivity in the PMS patients. Within the PMS group, 
the DRSP score negatively correlated with the PFC-thalamic connectivity. 
The authors concluded that these findings may provide preliminary 
evidence for abnormal thalamo -cortical connectivity in PMS patients and 
may contribute to a better understanding of the pathophysiology of PMS.         
 
 
 
   
   
     
  
  
  
   
 
  
   
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
   
          
  
 
       
   
 
   
  
 
    
    
  
    
 
 
           
  
           Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 24 of 39 
Dubol and colleagues (2020) noted that endocrine organizational and 
activational influences on cognitive and affective circuits are likely critical 
to the development of PMDD. These investigators carried out an 
overview of the anatomical and functional neural characterization of this 
disorder by means of neuroimaging correlates, identified from 18 
publications (n = 361 subjects). While white matter integrity remains 
uninvestigated, greater cerebellar grey matter volume and metabolism 
were observed in patients with PMDD, along with altered serotonergic 
and GABAergic neurotransmission. Differential cor tico-limbic activation in 
response to emotional stimuli distinguishes the PMDD brain, namely 
enhanced amygdalar and diminished fronto -cortical function. Thus far, 
the emotional distress and dysregulation linked to PMDD appeared to be 
defined by structural, chemical and functional brain signatures; however, 
their characterization remains sparsely studied and somewhat 
inconsistent. The authors concluded that clear and well -replicated 
neurobiological features of PMDD are needed to promote timely 
diagnoses and inform development of prevention and treatment 
strategies. 
Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Clinical manifestations and 
diagnosis of premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric 
disorder” (Yonkers and Casper, 2020) does not mention neuroimaging as 
a management option. 
Allopregnanolone Antagonists (e.g., Sepranolone) forthe Treatment 
of PMS / PMDD 
Carlini and Deligiannidis (2020) stated that the emergence of evidence 
implicating allopregnanolone in the etiology of PMDD has led to novel 
drug development. A phase -II clinical trial in a sample of women with 
PMDD of sepranolone, an allopregnanolone anta gonist, conducted over 
the length of 1 menstrual cycle demonstrated that patients receiving the 
active compound had significant reduction in symptoms compared to 
placebo as measured by the total score of the DRSP. Sepranolone was 
dosed as a 10 -mg or 16 -mg subcutaneous injection standardized to 0.4 
ml every other day during the luteal phase for a total of 5 injections, with 
the 1st injection occurring at ovulation. In addition to the primary outcome 
of reduction in DRSP total score, secondary outcomes of reduction in 
DRSP negative mood score (a subscale composed of the sum of         
         
        
         
  
  
           
 
    
          
  
 
 
         
   
 
 
 
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 25 of 39 
depression, anxiety, lability, and anger/irritability items) and reduction in a 
functional impairment score were also compared between groups. 
Marginally significant reductions in functional impairment (p = 0.091) and 
DRSP negative mood score (p = 0.051) were found in the active 
treatment group compared to placebo. Furthermore, there was no 
significant difference in frequency of AEs between groups, with the most 
common AE being injection site reaction, leading the study authors to 
conclude that the findings of this study suggested a favorable safety 
profile compared to the established treatment protocols with SSRIs and 
oral contraceptives. 
Furthermore, a n UpToDate review on “Treatment of premenstrual 
syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder” (Casper and Yonkers, 
2020) does not mention allopregnanolone antagonist / sepranolone as a 
management / therapeutic option. 
Aromatherapy for the Treatment of Premenstrual 
Syndrome 
Es-Haghee and colleagues  (2020)  noted that  PMS  is  a common 
disturbance among women of  child-bearing age.  These researchers  
examined the effects  of  aromatherapy  on PMS  symptoms.  PubMed,  
Scopus,  and Cochrane Library  databases  were searched through relevant  
search terms  until  October  2020.  The effect  sizes  were pooled as  WMD  
and 95 %  CI  using the random  effect  model.  Egger  tests  and visual  
inspection of  the funnel  plot  were conducted to identify  the existence of  
publication bias.  The I -squared (I2)  test  was  used to measure 
heterogeneity.  A  total  of  8 studies  were included in this  analysis.  The 
quantitative synthesis  of  evidence found that  aromatherapy  decreased 
PMS  scores (WMD -13.83;  95 %  CI:  -22.04 to -5.63,  I2 =  94.5  
%),  total  psychological  symptoms  of  PMS  (WMD  -3.51;  95 %  CI:  -4.84 to  
-2.18,  I2 =  82.6 %),  anxiety  of  PMS  (WMD -1.78;  95 %  CI:  -3.17 to -0.38,  
I2 =  94.2 %),  depression of  PMS  (WMD -2.0;  95 %  CI:  -3.65 to -0.34,  I2 =  
93.7 %),  and fatigue of  PMS  (WMD  - 1.44;  95 %  CI:  -2.44 to -0.44,  I2 =  89.7 %)  
93.8   compared to the control  group.  The authors  concluded that  aromatherapy   
93.9   was  an effective tool  for  the relief  of  PMS  symptoms.  Moreover,  these researchers   
93.10  stated that  additional  RCTs  with different  durations  and essential  oils  should be  
conducted to confirm  these  findings.  They  noted that  to reproduce these 
results,  a pre -test  is  recommended prior  to using aromatherapy,  ensuring 
that  subjects  have healthy  olfactory  function and do not  experience negative 
responses  to the oils  selected.  Furthermore,  an increase  in inhalation time         
      
  
 
        
          
        
    
  
      
      
        
        
       
      
 
     
     
        
 
 
 
     
       
      
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
  
  
  
  Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 26 of 39 
and a higher number of sessions should be considered for future 
aromatherapy treatments. 
The authors stated that his study had several drawbacks. The small number 
of studies (n = 8) that examined symptoms of PMS was a primary limitation of this study. Publication bias in the studies that examined the impact of 
aromatherapy on PMS scores produced another limitation although publication bias should be interpreted with caution given the small sample 
size. Furthermore, the heterogeneity among studies was high. The high amount of heterogeneity among studies may be due to the differences in 
duration of the treatment session, the total number of sessions, frequency 
of the treatment, forms of essential oils, different volatile compounds, and 
outcome assessment tool. Furthermore, 3 out of the 8 studies included in 
the systematic review were only found to be of fair quality. 
Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Treatment of premenstrual
 
syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder” (Casper and Yonkers, 
 
2021) does not mention aromatherapy as a management / therapeutic 
 
option.
 
CPT Codes/ HCPCS Codes/ICD -10 Codes
Information in the [brackets] below has been added for clarification 
purposes. Codes requiring a 7th character are represented by “+” 
Code Code Description 
58661 Laparoscopy surgical; with removal of adnexal structures 
(partial or total oophorectomy and /or salpingectomy 
58940 Oophorectomy, partial or total, unilateral or bilateral 
84436 Thyroxine; total 
84439 Free         
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
         
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
    
   
   
 
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 27 of 39 
Code Code Description 
84443 Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) 
90791 Psychiatric diagnostic evaluation 
90792 Psychiatric diagnostic evaluation with medical services 
96130 -96131 Psychological testing evaluation services by phy  sician or other  
qualified  health  care  professional,  including  integration  of  patient  
data,  interpretation  of  standardized  test  results  and  clinical  data,  
clinical decision making, treatment planning and report, and 
interactive  feedback  to  the  patient,  family  member(s)  or  
caregiver(s), when performed  
96136 -96137 Psychological or neuropsychological test administration and 
scoring by physician or other qualified health care professional, 
two or more tests, any method 
96138 -96139 Psychological or neuropsychological test administration and 
scoring by technician, two or more tests, any method 
96146 Psychological or neuropsychological test administration, with 
single automated, standardized instrument via electronic 
platform, with a utomated result only 
 
Vestibular  stimulation,  plasma  leptin,  measurement of  serum  
trace e  lements,  allopregnaolone an  tagonist - no specific code  
0111T Long -chain (C20 -22) omega -3 fatty acids in red blood cell 
(RBC) membrane 
Hysterectomy (open) 
58353  Endometrial ablation, thermal, without hysteroscopic guidance 
58356 Endometrial cryoablation with ultrasonic guidance, including 
endometrial curettage, when performed 
58541 -58544 Laparoscopy, surgical, supracervical hysterectomy 
58550 -58554 Laparoscopy, surgical, with vaginal hysterectomy 
58563 Hysteroscopy, surgical; with endometrial ablation (e.g., 
endometrial resection, electrosurgical ablation, thermoablation)        Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 28 of 39  
 
   
 
 
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  Code Code Description 
70554 Magnetic resonance imaging,  brain, functional MRI; including  
test selection and administration of repetitive body part  
movement and/or visual stimulation, not requiring physician or  
psychologist administration [neuroimaging]  
70555 requiring physician or psychologist administration of entire  
 
neurofunctional testing [neuroimaging]  
82180 Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C), blood 
82306 Calcifediol (25 -OH Vitamin D -3) 
82307 Calciferol (Vitamin D) 
82310 Calcium; total 
82530 Cortisol; free 
82533 Cortisol; total 
82607 Cyancobalamin (Vitamin B -12) 
82608 unsaturated binding capacity 
82652 Dihydroxyvitamin D, 1,25 ­
82670 Estradiol 
82671 Estrogens; fractionated 
82672 Total 
82677 Estriol 
82679 Estrone 
82725 Fatty acids, nonesterified 
82726 Very long chain fatty acids 
82746 Folic acid; serum 
82747 RBC 
83001 Gonadotropin; follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) 
83002 luteinizing hormone (LH) 
83540 Iron 
83735 Magnesium 
84100 Phosphorus inorganic (phosphate) 
84105 Urine         
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
          
 
    
  
 
   
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
          
  
   
  Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 29 of 39 
Code Code  Description  
84144 Progesterone 
84207 Pyridoxal phosphate (Vitamin B -6) 
84252 Riboflavin (Vitamin B -2) 
84255 Selenium 
84425 Thiamine (Vitamin B -1) 
84446 Tocopherol alpha (Vitamin E) 
84590 Vitamin A 
84591 Vitamin, not otherwise specified 
84597 Vitamin K 
84630 Zinc 
+ 88155  Cytopathology, slides, cervical or vaginal, definitive hormonal 
 
evaluation (e.g., maturation index, karyopyknotic index, 
 
estrogenic index) (List separately in addition to code(s) for other 
 
technical and interpretation services) 
 
95923 Testing of autonomic nervous system function; sudomotor, 
 
including one or more of the following: quantitative sudomotor 
 
axon reflex test (QSART), silastic sweat imprint, 
thermoregulatory sweat test, and changes in sympathetic skin 
 
Potential 
 
96900 Actinotherapy (ultraviolet light) 
97810 -97814 Acupuncture 
58570 -58573 Laparoscopy, surgical, with total hysterectomy 
J1205 Injection, chlorothiazide sodium, per 500 mg 
J1950 Injection, leuprolide acetate (for depot suspension), per 3.75 mg 
J9202 Goserelin acetate implant, per 3.6 mg 
J9217 -J9219 Leuprolide acetate 
S4993 Contraceptive pills for birth control        Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 30 of 39  
 
   
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  Code Code Description 
S9560 Home injectable therapy; hormonal therapy (e.g.; leuprolide,  
goserelin), including administrative services,  professional  
pharmacy services, care coordination, and all necessary  
supplies and equipment (drugs and nursing visits  coded  
separately), per diem  
A4633 Replacement bulb/lamp for ultraviolet light therapy system, each 
E0691 Ultraviolet light therapy system panel, includes bulbs/lamps,  
timer and eye protection; treatment area 2 sq feet or less   
 E0692 Ultraviolet light therapy system panel, includes bulbs/lamps,  
timer and eye protection; 4 ft  panel  
E0693 Ultraviolet light therapy system panel, includes bulbs/lamps,  
 
timer and eye protection; 6 ft  panel  
E0694 Ultraviolet  multidirectional  light therapy system in 6 ft cabinet,  
 
includes bulbs/lamps, timer and eye protection  
J0725 Injection, chorionic gonadotropin, per 1000 USP units 
J0735 Injection, clonidine HCl, 1 mg 
J1120 Injection, acetazolamide sodium, up to 500 mg 
J3415 Injection, pyridoxine HCl, 100 mg 
J3475 Injection, magnesium sulphate, per 500 mg 
J7296 Levonorgestrel -releasing intrauterine contraceptive system  
 
(Kyleena), 19.5 mg  
J7297 Levonorgestrel -releasing intrauterine contraceptive system,  52  
 
mg, 3 year duration  
J7298 Levonorgestrel -releasing intrauterine contraceptive system,  52  
 
mg, 5 year duration  
J7301 Levonorgestrel -releasing  intrauterine  contraceptive  system,  13.5  
 
Mg  
J7306 Levonorgestril (contraceptive)  implant system, including  
 
implants and supplies  
S4981 Insertion of levonorgestrel -releasing intrauterine system 
N94.3 Premenstrual tension syndrome [PMS] [PMDD]        
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
            
        
  
    
       
  
        
       
   
             
 
 
           
      
 
  
         
  
   
      
  
    
         
  
  
       
       
  
       
      
       
       
    
       
  Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 31 of 39 
Code Code Description 
F32.81 Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
The above policy is based on the following references: 
1. Altshuler LL, Cohen LS, Moline ML, et al. The Expert Consensus 
Guideline Series. Treatment of depression in women. Postgrad 
Med. 2001;(Spec No):1 -107. 
2. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
(ACOG). Management of premenstrual syndrome. ACOG Practice 
Bulletin. Washington, DC: ACOG; April 2000. 
3. Andrade C. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder: General overview, 
treatment strategies, and focus on sertraline for symptom- onset 
dosing. Indian J Psychiatry. 2016;58(3):329 -331. 
4. Armour M, Ee CC, Hao J, et al. Acupuncture and acupressure for 
premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2018;:CD005290. 
5. Bahrami A, Gonoodi K, Khayyatzadeh SS, et al. The association of 
trace elements with premenstrual syndrome, dysmenorrhea and 
irritable bowel syndrome in adolescents. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2019;233:114- 119. 
6. Bhatia SC, Bhatia SK. Diagnosis and treatment of premenstrual 
dysphoric disorder. Am Fam Physician. 2002;66(7):1239 -1248. 
7. Brown J, O'Brien PMS, Marjoribanks J, Wyatt K. Selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors forpremenstrual syndrome. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD001396. 
8. Bunevicius R, Hinderliter AL, Light KC, et al. Lack of beneficial 
eﬀects of clonidine in the treatment of premen strual dysphoric 
disorder: Results of a double -blind, randomized study. Hum 
Psychopharmacol. 2005;20(1):33 -39. 
9. Carlini SV, Deligiannidis KM. Evidence -based treatment of 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder: A concise review. J Clin 
Psychiatry. 2020;81:(2). 
Casper RF, Yonkers KA. Treatment of premenstrual syndrome 
and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. UpToDate [online 
serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed August 2015. 
(Updated March 2018, March 2020; March 2021). 
10. Dante G, Facchinetti F. Herbal treatments for alleviating 
premenstrual symptoms: A systematic review. J Psychosom 
Obstet Gynaecol. 2011;32(1):42 -51.        
        
  
        
         
  
          
  
  
 
          
  
      
          
  
         
 
          
  
 
    
   
  
 
    
        
    
 
   
       
 
           
 
 
       
  
          
  
  
      Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 32 of 39 
11. Daugherty JE.Treatment strategies forpremenstrual syndrome. 
Am Fam Physician. 1998;58(1):183 -192. 
12. Deligiannidis KM,Freeman MP. Complementary and alternative 
medicine for the treatment of depressive disorders in women. 
Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2010;33(2):441 -463. 
13. Di Florio A, Alexander D, Schmidt PJ, Rubinow DR. Progesterone 
and plasma metabolites in women with and in t hose without 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Depress Anxiety. 
2018;35(12):1168 -1177. 
14. Dimmock PW, Wyatt KM, Jones PW, O’Brien PM. Eﬃcacy of 
selective serotonin -reuptake inhibitors in premenstrual 
syndrome: Asystematic review.Lancet. 2000;356:1131 -1136. 
15. Dubol M, Epperson CN, Lanzenberger R, et al. Neuroimaging 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder: A systematic and critical 
review. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2020 Apr 5 [Online ahead of 
print]. 
16. Ernst E. Is reflexology an eﬀective intervention? A systematic 
review of randomised controlled trials. Med J Aust. 
2009;191(5):263 -266. 
17. Es-Haghee S, Shabani F, Hawkins J, et al. The eﬀects of 
aromatherapy on premenstrual syndrome symptoms: 
A systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized 
clinical tria ls. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 
2020;2020:6667078. 
18. Evans SM, Haney M, Levin FR, et al. Mood and performance 
changes in women with perimenstrual dysphoric disorder: Acute 
eﬀects of alprazolam. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
1998;19(6):499 -516. 
19. Ford O, Let haby A, Roberts H, Mol BW. Progesterone for 
premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009; 
(2):CD003415. 
20. Ford O, Lethaby A, Roberts H, Mol BW. Progesterone for 
premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;3:CD003415. 
21. Freeman EW, Halbreich U.Premenstrual syndromes. 
Psychopharmacol Bull. 1998;34(3):291 -295. 
22. Freeman EW, Rickels K, Sondheimer SJ, Polansky M. Diﬀerential 
response to antidepressants in women with premenstrual 
syndrome/premenstrual dysphoric disorder: A randomized 
contr olled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1999;56(10):932 -939.        
          
       
 
             
 
  
        
        
  
       
      
 
      
      
 
            
  
     
  
    
       
 
             
       
 
       
  
    
         
  
         
 
   
          
        
  
           
        
   
           
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 33 of 39 
23. Freeman EW. Luteal phase administration of agents for the 
treatment of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. CNS Drugs. 
2004;18(7):453 -468. 
24. Hagen I, Nesheim BI, Tuntland T. No eﬀect of vitamin B-6 against 
premenstrual tension. A controlled clinical study. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand. 1985;64(8):667 -670. 
25. Hasanpour M, Mohammadi MM, Shareinia H, et al. Eﬀects of 
reflexology on premenstrual syndrome: A systematic review and 
meta -analysis. Biopsychosoc Med . 2019;13(25). 
26. Hofmeister S, Bodden S. Premenstrual syndrome and 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Am Fam Physician. 
2016;94(3):236 -240. 
27. Hou L, Huang Y, Zhou R. Premenstrual syndrome is associated 
with alteredcortisol awakening response. Stress. 2019;22(6):640 - 
646. 
28. Jang SH, Kim DI, Choi MS. Eﬀects and treatment methods of 
acupuncture and herbal medicine for premenstrual 
syndrome/premenstrual dysphoric disorder: Systematic review. 
BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014;14:11. 
29. Jermain DM, Preece CK, Sykes RL, et al. Luteal phase sertraline 
treatment for premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Arch Fam Med. 
1999;8(4):328 -332. 
30. Jing Z, Yang X, Ismail KMK, et al. Chinese herbal medicine for 
premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009; 
(1):CD006414. 
31. Johnson SR. Premenstrual syndrome therapy. Clin Obstet 
Gynecol. 1998;41(2):405 -421. 
32. Johny M, Kumar SS, Rajagopalan A, Mukkadan JK. Vestibular 
stimulation for management of premenstrual syndrome. J Nat Sci 
Biol Med. 2017;8(1):82 -86. 
33. Kayatekin ZE, Sabo AN, Halbreich U. Levetiracetam for treatment 
of premenstrual dysphoric disorder: A pilot, open -label study. 
Arch Womens Ment Health. 2008;11(3):207 -211. 
34. Keenan PA, Stern RA, Janowsky DS, Pedersen CA. Psychological 
aspects of premenstrual syndrome. I: Cognition and memory. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1992;17(2 -3):179 -187. 
35. Khine K, Rosenstein DL, Elin RJ, et al. Magnesium (mg) retention 
and mood eﬀects after intravenous mg infusion in premenstrual 
dysphoric disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;59(4):327 -333. 
36. Kiesner J, Granger DA. A lack of consistent evidence for cortisol 
dysregulation in premenstrual syndrome/premenstrual        
      
        
  
            
  
          
        
           
      
        
         
  
       
     
 
    
     
   
     
        
  
    
       
   
  
           
       
  
   
     
 
 
            
  
 
   
 
         Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 34 of 39 
dysphoric  disorder.  Psychoneuroendocrinology.  2016  r;65:149 - 
164.  
37. Kim SY, Park HJ, Lee H, Lee H. Acupuncture for premenstrual 
syndrome: A systematic review and meta -analysis of randomised 
controlled trials. BJOG. 2011;118(8):899 -915. 
38. Klein TA. Oﬃce gynecology for the primary care physician, Part II. 
Med Clin North Am. 1996;80(2):321 -336. 
39. Kwan I, Onwude JL. Premenstrual syndrome. In: BMJ Clinical 
Evidence. London, UK: BMJ Publishing Group; July 2009. 
40. Leminen H, Heliövaara -Peippo S, Halmesmäki K, et al. The eﬀect 
of hysterectomy or levonorgestrel -releasing intrauterine system 
on premenstrual symptoms in women treated for menorrhagia: 
Secondary analysis of a randomized controlled trial. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand. 2012;91(3):318 -325. 
41. Liu P, Wei Y, Liao H, et al. Thalamocortical dysconnectivity in 
premenstrualsyndrome. Brain Imaging Behav. 2019;13(3):717 - 
724. 
42. Lopez LM, Kaptein A, Helmerhorst FM. Oral contraceptives 
containing drospirenone forpremenstrual syndrome.Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006586. 
43. Mazza M, Harnic D, Catalano V, et al. Duloxetine for 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder: A pilot study. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother. 2008;9(4):517 -521. 
44. Michener W, Rozin P, Freeman E, Gale L. The role of low 
progesterone and tension as triggers of perimenstrual chocolate 
and sweets craving: Some negative experimental evidence. 
Physiol Behav. 1999;67(3):417 -420. 
45. Moslehi M, Arab A, Shadnoush M, Hajianfar H. The association 
between serum magnesium and premenstrual syndrome: A 
systematic review and meta -analysis of observational studies. 
Biol Trace Elem Res. 2019;192(2):145 -152. 
46. Naheed B, Kuiper JH, Uthman OA, et al. Non -contraceptive 
oestrogen -containing preparations forcontrolling symptoms of 
premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2017;3:CD010503. 
47. Nicolau ZFM, Bezerra AG, Polesel DN, et al. Plasma leptin and 
premenstrual syndrome: A review. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 
2017;72(11):659 -662. 
48. O'Brien PM, Abukhalil IE. Randomized controlled trial of the 
management of premenstrual syndrome and p remenstrual 
mastalgia using luteal phase -only danazol. Am J Obstet Gynecol.        
  
             
   
 
            
       
     
       
  
       
        
  
   
           
        
           
       
  
          
   
  
  
       
  
   
     
  
    
     
  
          
  
   
   
       
          
 
  
    
      
       Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 35 of 39 
1999;180(1 Pt 1):18 -23. 
49. Ozeren S, Corakci A, Yucesoy I, et al. Fluoxetine in the treatment 
of premenstrual syndrome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 
1997;73(2):167 -170. 
50. Ozisik HI, Kamisli O, Karlidag R, et al. Sympathetic skin response 
in premenstrual syndrome. Clin Auton Res. 2005;15(3):233 -237. 
51. Pearlstein T, Yonkers KA. Review of fluoxetine and its clinical 
applications in premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother. 2002;3(7):979 -991. 
52. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder. In: Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM IV). 4th ed. Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Association;1994:715 -718. 
53. Premenstrual syndrome (Premenstrual tension). In: Current 
Medical Diagnosis & Treatment. 38th ed. LM Tierney, Jr, et al., 
eds. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange; 1999; Ch.17:703 -736. 
54. Ramos MG, Hara C, Rocha FL. Duloxetine treatment for women 
with premenstrual dysphoric disorder: A single -blind trial. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2009;12(8):1081 -1088. 
55. Rapkin A. A review of treatment of premenstrual syndrome and 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 
2003;28 Suppl 3:39 -53. 
56. Rapkin AJ, Mikacich JA. Premenstrual syndrome and 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder in adolescents. Curr Opin 
Obstet Gynecol. 2008;20(5):455 -463. 
57. Reid RL, Soares CN. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder: 
Contemporary diagnosis and management. J Obstet Gynaecol 
Can. 2018;40(2):215 -223. 
58. Rubinow DR, Schmidt PJ, Roca CA. Hormone measures in 
reproductiveendocrine -related mooddisorders: Diagnostic 
issues. Psychopharmacol Bull. 1998;34(3):289 -290. 
59. Rubinow DR, Schmidt PJ. Premenstrual syndrome: A review of 
endocrine studies. Endocrinologist. 1992;2:47 -56. 
60. Sani G, Kotzalidis GD, Panaccione I, et al. Low -dose 
acetazolamide in the treatment of premenstrual dysphoric 
disorder: A case series. Psychiatry Investig. 2014;11(1):95 -101. 
61. Schmidt PJ, Grover GN, Rubinow DR. Alprazolam in the treatment 
of premenstrual syndrome. A double -blind, placebo -controlled 
trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1993;50(6):467 -473. 
62. Sepede G, Sarchione F, Matarazzo I, et al. Premenstrual 
dysphoric disorder without comorbid psychiatric conditions: A 
systematic review of terapeutic options. ClinNeuropharmacol.        
 
             
          
    
        
 
    
        
 
     
 
           
       
           
 
  
 
        
   
   
           
         
  
    
         
  
         
       
   
     
  
      
 
           
      
  
          
      
  
  
     Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 36 of 39 
2016;39(5):241 -261. 
63. Steiner M, Pearlstein T, Cohen LS, et al. Expert guidelines for the 
treatment of severe PMS, PMDD, and comorbidities: The role of 
SSRIs. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2006;15(1):57 -69. 
64. Steiner M. Premenstrual syndromes. Annu Rev Med. 
1997;48:447 -455. 
65. Ugarriza DN, Klingner S, O'Brien S. Premenstrual syndrome: 
Diagnosis and intervention. Nurse Pract. 1998;23(9):40, 45, 49-52, 
passim. 
66. Ussher JM, Perz J. Evaluation of the relative eﬃcacy of a couple 
cognitive -behaviour therapy (CBT) for premenstrual disorders 
(PMDs), in comparison to one-to-one CBT and a wait list control: 
A randomized controlled trial. PLoS One. 2017;12(4):e0175068. 
67. Wang M, Hammarback S, Lindhe BA, Backstrom T. Treatment of 
premenstrual syndrome by spironolactone: A double -blind, 
placebo- controlled study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 
1995;74(10):803 -808. 
68. Weinstock LS, Moline M. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder. In: 
Conn’s Current Therapy. R.E. Rakel, ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB 
Saunders Co.; 1999: 1082 -1085. 
69. Whelan AM, Jurgens TM, Naylor H. Herbs, vitamins and minerals 
in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: A systematic review. 
Can J Clin Pharmacol. 2009;16(3):e407 -e429. 
70. Wilson AC, Meethal SV, Bowen RL, Atwood CS. Leuprolide 
acetate: A drug of diverse clinical applications. Expert Opin 
Investig Drugs. 2007;16(11):1851 -1863. 
71. Wyatt K, Dimmock P, Jones P, Obhrai M, O’Brien S. Eﬃcacy of 
progesterone and progestogens in management of premenstrual 
syndrome: Systematic review. BMJ. 2001;323:776 -780. 
72. Wyatt KM, Dimmock PW, Ismail KM, et al. The eﬀectiveness of 
GnRHa with and without 'add -back' therapy in treating 
premenstrual syndrome: A meta analysis. BJOG. 2004;111(6):585 - 
593. 
73. Wyatt KM, Dimmock PW, Jones PW, O’Brien PM. Eﬃcacy of 
vitamin B -6 in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: 
Systemati c review. BMJ. 1999;318:1375 -1381. 
74. Yonkers KA, Casper RF,. Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of 
premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. 
UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed 
March 2020. 
75. Yonkers KA, Halbreich U, Freeman E, et al. Symptomatic        
       
 
   
 
        
      
      
       
  
    
        
   
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 37 of 39 
improvement ofpremenstrual dysphoric disorder with sertraline 
treatment. A randomized controlled trial. Sertraline 
Premenstrual Dysphoric Collaborative Study Group. JAMA. 
1997;278(12):983 -988. 
76. Yonkers KA.Antidepressants inthe treatment ofpremenstrual 
dysphoric disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 1997;58(Suppl 14):4 -10. 
77. Yu J, Robinson VA, Liu B, et al. Acupuncture for premenstrual 
syndrome (Protocol for Cochrane Review). Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2005;(2):CD005290. 
78. Zhang J, Cao L, Wang Y, et al. Acupuncture for premenstrual 
syndrome at diﬀerent intervention time: A systemic review and 
meta -analysis. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 
2019;2019:6246285.        
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
                    
     
                  
                    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 38 of 39 
Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan benefits and 
constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or 
program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any 
results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna 
or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medica l advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be 
updated and therefore is subject to change. 
Copyright © 2001 -2021 Aetna Inc.        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 39 of 39 
AETNA BETTER HEALTH® OF PENNSYLVANIA 
Amendment to 
 
Aetna Clinical Policy Bulletin Number: 0512 Premenstrual 
 
Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder 
 
There are no amendments for Medicaid. 
revised 07/13/2021 