   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
  
 
 
  
        
    
          
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna  Page 1 of 34 
Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal 
Sympathetic Nerve 
POLICY HISTORY 
Last Review: 12/17/2020 
Effective:  05/17/2013 
Next Review: 10/14/2021 
Review History 
Deﬁnitions  
Additional Information 
Clinical Policy Bulletin 
Notes Number: 0847 
POLICY 
*Please see amendment for Pennsylvania Medicaid at the end of this CPB. 
Aetna considers radiofrequency ablation of the renal sympathetic nerve 
experimental and investigational for the treatment of the following 
indications (not an all-inclusive list) because of insufficient evidence in the 
peer-reviewed literature: 
Acute myocardial infarction 
 
Cardiac arrhythmias 
  
Chronic kidney -related pain 
 
Chronic renal failure 
  
Heart failure 
 
Hypertension  
 
Obstructive sleep apnea 
 
Ventricular tachycardia. 
  
See also: 
 
CPB 0820 -Carotid Sinus Stimulation for Hypertension (0820.html) .
      
 
 
 
     
         
          
         
        
        
        
     
     
 
    
         
   
     
           
          
         
          
  
 
           
        
              
        
   
          
          
      
          
       
          
      
           
            
         
    
      
             
        Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 2 of 34 
BACKGROUND 
Hypertension is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease. 
Treatment frequently includes administration of three or more drugs. Resistant hypertension is defined as blood pressure which remains above 
target levels despite use of the maximum tolerated dose of antihypertensive medications, consisting of at least three different classes 
of drugs, including a diuretic. Radiofrequency (RF) ablation of sympathetic nerve fibers around renal arteries has been proposed as a non-pharmacologic treatment to reduce blood pressure in drug resistant 
hypertension (Simonyi et al, 2013). 
Selective renal sympathetic denervation interrupts the influence of the 
sympathetic nervous system on the kidney and systemic hemodynamics. 
The sympathetic innervation of the kidney is implicated in the 
pathogenesis of hypertension through effects on renin secretion, 
increased plasma renin activity that leads to sodium and water retention, 
and reduction of renal blood flow. Renal sympathetic ablation is a minimally invasive procedure utilizing a RF catheter inserted through the 
femoral artery and selectively engaging the renal artery (Papademitriou et 
al, 2011). 
Krum et al (2009) performed a proof -of-principle trial of therapeutic renal 
sympathetic denervation in patients with resistant hypertension (i.e., 
systolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 160 mm Hg on 3 or more 
anti-hypertensive medications, including a diuretic) to assess safety and 
blood- pressure reduction effectiveness. The investigators enrolled 50 
patients at 5 Australian and European centers; 5 patients were excluded 
for anatomical reasons (primarily due to dual renal artery systems). 
Patients received percutaneous RF catheter -basedtreatment between 
June 2007 and November 2008, with subsequent follow -up to 1 
year. The effectiveness of renal sympathetic denervation with renal noradrenaline spillover was assessed in a subgroup of patients. Primary 
endpoints were office blood pressure and safety data before the 
procedure and at 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after the procedure. Renal 
angiography was done before, immediately after, and 14 to 30 days after 
procedure, and magnetic resonance angiogram was assessed 6 months 
after procedure. Blood- pressure lowering effectiveness was analyzed 
using repeated measures ANOVA. In treated patients, baseline mean 
office blood pressure was 177/101 mm Hg (SD 20/15), (mean of 4.7 anti-
hypertensive medications); estimated glomerular filtration rate was 81      
 
     
           
      
           
      
              
  
        
      
    
        
       
           
    
 
      
        
          
          
       
     
          
         
             
      
      
  
         
     
    
 
       
         
     
            
          
           
        
           Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 3 of 34 
ml/min/1.73m(2) (SD 23); and mean reduction in renal noradrenaline 
spillover was 47 % (95 % confidence interval [CI]: 28 % to 65 %). Office blood pressures after procedure were reduced by -14/-10, -21/-10, 
-22/-11, -24/-11, and - 27/-17 mm Hg at 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months, 
respectively. In the 5 non -treated patients, mean rise in office blood 
pressure was +3/-2, +2/+3, +14/+9, and +26/+17 mm Hg at 1, 3, 6, and 9 
months, respectively. One intra- procedural renal artery dissection 
occurred before RF energy delivery, without further sequelae. There 
were no other renovascular complications. The authors concluded that 
catheter -based renal denervation causes substantial and sustained 
blood- pressure reduction, without serious adverse events , in patients with 
resistant hypertension. They also stated that prospective randomized 
clinical trials are needed to investigate the usefulness of this procedure in 
the management of this condition. 
A prioritizing summary of the Australia and New Zealand Horizon Scanning Network on renal sympathetic denervation for the treatment of resistant hypertension concluded that based on the low level of available 
evidence, it would appear that renal denervation may be a viable option 
for the treatment of resistant hypertension (Mundy & Hiller, 2010). Blood 
pressure was significantly lower after renal denervation than that measured at baseline; however, it is unclear whether this decrease is considered clinically significant. Final 12-month follow -up data wer e only 
reported for a small portion of the enrolled patients (22%) and in addition, 
six of the 45 patients were considered non- responders with non-
significant reductions in blood pressure. The summary concluded that well conducted randomized controlled trial is needed to adequately investigate whether renal denervation is capable of producing a sustained 
lowering of blood pressure in hypertensive patients resistant to 
medication (Mundy & Hiller, 2010). 
Voskuil et al (2011) described their fir st experience with a percutaneous 
treatment modality using renal artery RF ablation. Selected patients were 
resistant to at least 3 types of anti -hypertensive medical therapy (office 
systolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 160 mm Hg; n = 9) or who did not tolerate medication (n = 2). Between July and November 
2010, a total of 11 patients received percutaneous RF treatment and were 
followed for 1 month after treatment. Urine and blood samples were 
taken to evaluate the effects on renal function and neurohumeral factors.      
 
        
     
             
         
          
              
            
         
       
        
         
 
       
      
         
     
        
      
          
         
         
              
        
         
       
          
     
          
   
      
      
     
        
          
       
       
      Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 4 of 34 
No peri-procedural complications or adverse events during follow -up were 
noted. A reduction of mean office blood pressure was observed from 
203/109 +/-32/19 mmHg at baseline to 178/97 +/-28/21 mm Hg at 
1 month follow -up (mean difference 25 +/ -12 mm Hg, p < 0.01). The 
investigators also noted a significant decrease in aldosterone level (391 
+/-210 pmol/L versus 250 +/-142 pmol/L; p = 0.03), but there was no 
decrease in plasma renin activity (190 +/-134 fmol/L/s versus 195 +/­
163 fmol/L/s; p = 0.43). No change in renal function was noted. The authors concluded that catheter -based renal denervation seems an 
attractive novel minimally invasive treatment option in patients with resistant hypertension, with a low-risk of serious adverse events. 
Mahfoud et al (2011) summarized the expert consensus and recommendations of the working group 'Herz und Niere' of the German Society of Cardiology (DGK), the German Society of Nephrology (DGfN) and the German Hypertension League (DHL) on renal denervation for 
anti-hypertensive treatment. Renal denervation was defined as a new, 
interventional approach to selectively denervate renal afferent and efferent sympathetic fibers. The authors noted that renal denervation has 
been demonstrated to reduce office systolic and diastolic blood pressure 
in patients with resistant hypertension, defined as systolic office blood pressure greater than or equal to 160 mm Hg and greater than or equal to 
150 mm Hg in patients with diabetes type 2, which should currently be used as blood pressure thresholds for undergoing the procedure. 
Exclusion of secondary hypertension causes and optimized anti -
hypertensive drug treatment was described as mandatory in every patient 
with resistant hypertension. They also specified that 24 -hour blood 
pressure measurements should be performed in order to exclude pseudo-
resistance. Preserved renal function was an inclusion criterion in the Symplicity studies. Therefore, renal denervation should be only 
considered in patients with a glomerular filtration rate greater than 45 
ml/min. Adequate center qualification in both treatment of hypertension and interventional expertise are essential to ensure correct patient selection and procedural safet y. The authors stated that long- term follow -
up after renal denervation and participation in the German Renal 
Denervation (GREAT) Registry are recommended to assess safety and 
efficacy after renal denervation over time.      
 
    
     
   
       
     
          
       
    
          
         
     
          
         
  
 
         
            
         
        
      
    
    
 
            
          
            
         
      
       
      
            
      
         
       
     
   
      
         Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 5 of 34 
Lobodzinski (2011) reviewed renal denervation system technology for 
treatment of drug resistant hypertension. These researchers described "an investigational device that is currently tested in an on- going clinical 
trial. The denervation device uses the RF thermal ablation catheter 
attached to the RF generator. The RF catheter is inserted into the renal artery and positioned in the vicinity of the efferent and afferent parasympathetic innervations. Renal denervation is a minimally invasive, localized procedure and the procedural and recovery times are very short. The entire procedure lasts about 40 minutes. In early clinical trials, 
the systolic blood pressure in 87 % of patients who underwent the 
denervation procedure resulted in an average blood pressure drop of greater than 10 mm Hg. The procedure has no systematic side effects, and appears to be beneficial in the management of hypertension in patients refractory to pharmacological therapy." 
Patel and White (2012) stated that renal artery intervention to t reat 
hypertension is one of the frontiers of ongoing research in combating this 
epidemic. The investigators discussed recent data regarding renal artery 
angioplasty with stenting (PTRS) and catheter -based renal sympathetic 
denervation. They noted that despite progress in this field, large, multi -
center, randomized trials that compare these treatment modalities with 
medical therapy for hypertension are lacking. 
Tam et al (2013) stated that resistant hypertension, defined as the failure 
to achieve target blood pressure despite concurrent use of 3 anti -
hypertensive agents of different classes, is estimated to affect 20 to 30 % 
of hypertensive patients. These patients are vulnerable to cardiovascular, 
cerebrovascular and renal complications. There is ample evidence that 
sympathetic nervous system hyperactivity contributes to the initiation, maintenance, and progression of hypertension. The renal sympathetic nervous system, in particular, has been identified as a major culprit for the 
development and progression of hypertension, heart failure and chronic kidney disease in both preclinical and human studies. Traditional surgical 
sympathectomy proposed in the 1940s was halted due to unacceptable operative risk and the emergence of anti-hypertensive medications. The 
authors report that recently, catheter -based renal sympathetic 
denervation by RF ablation has shown encouraging intermediate- term 
results with minimal complications in patients with resistant hypertension.      
 
      
        
         
          
       
   
         
        
      
        
   
 
         
       
    
    
       
       
        
      
             
           
    
      
        
     
           
         
   
        
        
       
         
       
      
           
       
        
     Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 6 of 34 
A May, 2012 National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence 
guideline stated that "current evidence on percutaneous transluminal RF 
sympathetic denervation of the renal artery for resistant hypertension is from limited numbers of patients, but there is evidence of efficacy in the 
short and medium term. There is inadequate evidence on efficacy in the 
long term; this is particularly important for a procedure aimed at treating resistant hypertension. The limited evidence suggests a low incidence of 
serious periprocedural complications, but there is inadequate evidence on 
long- term safety. Therefore this procedure should only be used with 
special arrangements for clinical governance, consent, and audit or research (NICE, 2012)." 
Esler et al (2012) noted that renal sympathetic nerve activation contributes to the pathogenesis of hypertension. Symplicity HTN -2, a 
multicenter, randomized trial, demonstrated that catheter -based renal 
denervation produced significant blood pressure lowering in treatment -
resistant patients 6 months after the procedure compared with controls, which were medication -only patients. The authors presented longer -term 
follow -up, including 6-month crossover results, is now presented. Eligible 
patients were on ≥3 antihypertensive drugs and had a baseline systolic 
blood pressure ≥160 mm Hg (≥150 mm Hg for type 2 diabetics). After the 
6-month primary end point was met, renal denervation in control patients 
was permitted. Patients randomized to immediate renal denervation 
(n=47) were evaluated one year post -procedure and crossover patients 
were evaluated 6 months post -procedure. At 12 months after the 
procedure, the mean fall in office systolic blood pressure in the initial 
renal denervation group (-28.1 mm Hg; 95% confidence interval, -35.4 to 
-20.7; P<0.001) was similar to the 6- month fall ( -31.7 mm Hg; 95% 
confidence interval, -38.3 to - 25.0; P=0.16 versus 6- month change). The 
mean systolic blood pressure of the crossover group 6 months after the 
procedure was significantly lowered (from 190.0±19.6 to 166.3±24.7 mm 
Hg; change, -23.7±27.5; P<0.001). In the crossover group, there was 1 
renal artery dissection during guide catheter insertion, before denervation, 
corrected by renal artery stenting, and 1 hypotensive episode, which 
resolved with medication adjustment. Control patients who crossed over 
to renal denervation with the Symplicity system had a significant drop in 
blood pressure similar to that observed in patients receiving immediate denervation. The authors concluded that renal denervation provided safe 
and sustained reduction of blood pressure to 1 year.      
 
 
       
       
       
      
      
      
           
      
        
          
           Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 7 of 34 
Geisler  et  al  (2012)  conducted a  study  to  assess  cost-effectiveness  and 
long- term  clinical  benefits  of  renal  denervation in  resistant  hypertensive  
patients.  The authors  noted  that  in  the  Symplicity  HTN -2  randomized 
controlled  trial,  catheter -based  renal  denervation  (RDN)  lowered  systolic 
blood pressure  by  32  ±  23 mm  Hg  from  178 ±  18  mm  Hg  at  baseline.  A 
state -transition  model  was  used  to  predict  the  effect  of  RDN  and  standard 
of  care  on 10-year  and  lifetime probabilities  of  stroke,  myocardial  
infarction,  all  coronary  heart  disease,  heart  failure,  end-stage renal  
disease,  and  median  survival.  The investigators  adopted  a societal  
perspective  and  estimated  an  incremental  cost-effectiveness  ratio  in  U.S. 
dollars  per  quality -adjusted  life-year,  both  discounted  at  3%  per  year.  
Robustness  and uncertainty  were  evaluated using  deterministic  and 
probabilistic  sensitivity  analyses.  Renal  denervation  substantially  reduced 
event  probabilities  (10-year/lifetime  relative risks: stroke  0.70/0.83; 
myocardial  infarction  0.68/0.85;  all  coronary  heart  disease  0.78/0.90;  
heart  failure  0.79/0.92;  end-stage  renal  disease  0.72/0.81).  Median 
survival  was  18.4 years  for  RDN  versus  17.1  years  for  standard of  care.  
The discounted lifetime incremental cost -effectiveness  ratio  was  $3,071 
per  quality -adjusted life- year.  The investigators  acknowledged that  
findings  were  relatively insensitive to v  ariations in input  parameters  
except  for  systolic  blood  pressure reduction,  baseline  systolic  blood  
pressure,  and  effect  duration.  The 95%  credible  interval  for  incremental  
cost-effectiveness  ratio was  cost-saving to  $31,460 per  quality -adjusted  
life-year.  The  model  suggests  that  catheter -based  renal  denervation,  over  
a  wide  range of  assumptions,  is  a  cost -effective strategy for resistant  
hypertension  that  might  result  in  lower  cardiovascular  morbidity  and 
mortality.  
The Sy
mplic ity HTN -3 Trial is currently in progress. Early clinical 
evaluation withcatheter -based, selective renal sympathetic denervation in 
patients with resistant hypertension has mechanistically correlated 
sympathetic efferent denervation with decreased renal norepinephrine 
spillover and renin activity, increased renal plasma flow, and has 
demonstrated clinically significant, sustained reductions in blood pressure. The SYMPLICITY HTN -3 Trial is a pivotal study designed as a 
prospective, randomized, masked procedure, single -blind trial evaluating 
the safety and effectiveness of catheter -based bilateral renal denervation 
for the treatment of uncontrolled hypertension despite compliance with at 
least 3 antihypertensive medications of different classes (at least one of      
 
           
          
        
 
          
       
      
      
             
        
       
       
         
          
   
            
         
                
                  
             
           
                
             
                     
        
      
           
       
      
          
   
 
 
            
          
         
       
       
             Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 8 of 34 
which is a diuretic) at maximal tolerable doses. The primary effectiveness 
endpoint is defined as the change in office -based systolic blood pressure 
from baseline to 6 months (Kandzari et al, 2012). 
In a pilot study, Ott et al (2013) examined the effect of RDN in patients 
with treatment -resistant hypertension (TRH) according to the established 
definition (Joint National Committee VII and European Society of 
Hypertension/European Society of Cardiology guidelines), i.e., office 
blood pressure (BP) greater than or equal to 140/90 mm Hg (with at least 
3 anti -hypertensive drugs, including a diuretic, in adequate doses) and 
confirmed by 24- hour ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM). In this study, 
there were 54 patients with moderate TRH (office BP greater than or 
equal to 140/90 mm Hg and less than 160/100 mm Hg and diagnosis confirmed by 24- hour ABPM of greater than or equal to 130/80 mm Hg) 
who underwent catheter -based RDN using the Symplicity catheter 
(Medtronic Inc., Mountain View, CA). Patients were treated with 5.1 ± 1.4 
anti-hypertensive drugs on average. Office BP was significantly reduced 
by 13/7 mm Hg 6 months after RDN (systolic: 151 ± 6 mm Hg versus 138 
± 21 mm Hg, p < 0.001; diastolic: 83 ± 11 mm Hg versus 75 ± 11 mm Hg, 
p < 0.001). In patients (n = 36) who underwent ABPM 6 months after treatment, there was a reduction in average 24- hour ABPM by 14/7 mm 
Hg (systolic: 150 ± 16 mm Hg versus 136 ± 16 mm Hg, p < 0.001; 
diastolic: 83 ± 10 mm Hg versus 76 ± 10 mm Hg, p < 0.001). In 51 % of 
patients, office BP was controlled below 140/90 mm Hg after RDN. In addition, heart rate decreased from 67 ± 11 to 63 ± 10 beats/min (p = 0.006). The authors concluded that these findings indicated that RDN 
may reduce office and 24- hour ambulatory BP substantially in patients 
with moderate TRH. The main drawbacks of this study were the lack of a 
control group and the relatively small sample size. These researchers stated that there is a need for a large- scale, prospective, randomized, 
multi-center, controlled trial in this group of TRH patients to precisely 
define the therapeutic role of RDN in moderate TRH. 
Fadl Elmula et al (2014) examined the BP -lowering effect of RDN versus 
clinically adjusted drug treatment in true TRH after excluding patients with 
confounding poor drug adherence. Patients with apparent TRH (n = 65) 
were referred for RDN, and those with secondary and spurious 
hypertension (n = 26) were excluded. Treatment -resistant hypertension 
was defined as office systolic BP (SBP) greater than 140 mm Hg, despite      
 
           
       
      
        
        
        
          
          
               
                   
            
                     
    
             
            
          
   
        
    
 
            
      
     
    
            
       
        
        
            
       
         
    
        
          
          
        
      
                
             Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 9 of 34 
maximally tolerated doses of greater than or equal to 3 anti-hypertensive 
drugs including a diuretic. In addition, ambulatory daytime SBP greater 
than 135 mm Hg after witnessed intake of anti-hypertensive drugs was 
required, after which 20 patients had normalized BP and were excluded. 
Patients with true TRH were randomized and underwent RDN (n = 9) 
performed with Symplicity Catheter System versus clinically adjusted drug 
treatment (n = 10). The study was stopped early for ethical reasons because RDN had uncertain BP -lowering effect. Office SBP and diastolic 
BP in the drug-adjusted group changed from 160 ± 14/88 ± 13 mm Hg (± 
SD) at baseline to 132 ± 10/77 ± 8 mm Hg at 6 months (p < 0.0005 and p 
= 0.02, SBP and diastolic BP, respectively) and in the RDN group from 
156 ± 13/91 ± 15 to 148 ± 7/89 ± 8 mm Hg (p = 0.42 and p = 0.48, SBP 
and diastolic BP, respectively). Systolic BP and diastolic BP were 
significantly lower in the drug- adjusted group at 6 months (p = 0.002 and 
p = 0.004, respectively), and absolute changes in SBP were larger in the 
drug- adjusted group (p = 0.008). Ambulatory BPs changed in parallel to 
office BPs. The authors concluded that these findings suggested t hat 
adjusted drug treatment has superior BP-lowering effects compared with 
RDN in patients with true TRH. 
Bhatt et al (2014) stated that prior unblinded studies have suggested that 
catheter -based RDN reduces blood pressure in patients with resistant 
hypertension. These investigators designed a prospective, single- blind, 
randomized, sham -controlled trial. Patients with severe resistant 
hypertension were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to undergo RDN or a 
sham procedure. Before randomization, patients were receiving a stable 
anti-hypertensive regimen involving maximally tolerated doses of at least 
3 drugs, including a diuretic. The primary efficacy end- point was the 
change in office SBP at 6 months; a secondary efficacy end-point was the 
change in mean 24- hour ambulatory SBP. The primary safety end- point 
was a composite of death, end- stage renal disease, embolic events 
resulting in end -organ damage, renovascular complications, or 
hypertensive crisis at 1 month or new renal -artery stenosis of more than 
70 % at 6 months. A total of 535 patients underwent randomization. The mean (± SD) change in SBP at 6 months was -14.13 ± 23.93 mm Hg in 
the denervation group as compared with -11.74 ± 25.94 mm Hg in the 
sham -procedure group (p < 0.001 for both comparisons of the change 
from baseline), for a difference of -2.39 mm Hg (95 % CI: -6.89 to 2.12; p 
= 0.26 for superiority with a margin of 5 mm Hg). The change in 24- hour      
 
       
           
          
        
       
         
         
 
          
     
       
        
   
          
     
          
        
       
        
           
             
      
            
                 
         
          
              
            
              
               
             
            
             
  
 
            
          
    
            Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 10 of 34 
ambulatory SBP was -6.75 ± 15.11 mm Hg in the denervation group and 
-4.79 ± 17.25 mm Hg in the sham -procedure group, for a difference of 
-1.96 mm Hg (95 % CI: -4.97 to 1.06; p = 0.98 for superiority with a 
margin of 2 mm Hg). There were no significant differences in safety 
between the 2 groups. The authors concluded that this blinded trial did not show a significant reduction of SBP in patients with resistant 
hypertension 6 months after RDN as compared with a sham control. 
Bakris et al (2014) noted that prior studies of catheter -based RDN have 
not systematically performed ambulatory blood pressure monitoring 
(ABPM) to assess the efficacy of the procedure. SYMPLICITY HTN -3 
(Renal Denervation in Patients With Uncontrolled Hypertension) was a prospective, blinded, randomized, sham -controlled trial. The cu rrent 
analysis detailed the effect of RDN or a sham procedure on ABPM 
measurements 6 months post -randomization. Patients with resistant 
hypertension were randomized 2:1 to renal denervation or sham control. 
Patients were on a stable anti-hypertensive regimen including maximally 
tolerated doses of at least 3 drugs including a diuretic before randomization. The powered secondary efficacy end-point was a change 
in mean 24-h ambulatory SBP. Non- dipper to dipper (nighttime BP 10 % 
to 20 % lower than daytime BP) conversion was calculated at 6 months. 
The 24- hour ambulatory SBP changed - 6.8 ± 15.1 mm Hg in the RDN 
group and -4.8 ± 17.3 mm Hg in the sham group: difference of -2.0 mm 
Hg (95 % CI: -5.0 to 1.1; p = 0.98 with a 2 mm Hg superiority margin). 
The daytime ambulatory SBP change difference between groups was 
-1.1 (95 % CI: -4.3 to 2.2; p = 0.52). The nocturnal ambulatory SBP 
change difference between groups was -3.3 (95 CI: -6.7 to 0.1; p = 0.06). 
The percent of non-dippers converted to dippers was 21.2 % in the RDN 
group and 15.0 % in the sham group (95 % CI: -3.8 % to 16.2 %; p = 
0.30). Change in 24-hour heart rate was -1.4 ± 7.4 in the RDN group and 
-1.3 ± 7.3 in the sham group; (95 % CI: -1.5 to 1.4; p = 0.94). The 
authors concluded that this trial did not demonstrate a benefit of RDN on 
reduction in ambulatory BP in either the 24- hour or day and night periods 
compared with sham. 
On January 9, 2014, Medtronic, Inc. announced that its U.S. pivotal trial in 
RDN for TRH, SYMPLICITY HTN- 3, failed to meet its primary efficacy 
end-point. Medtronic intends to formulate a panel of independent 
advisors made up of physicians and researchers who will be asked to      
 
       
        
    
       
 
 
           
       
          
     
      
     
        
        
    
   
    
     
      
        
         
       
    
      
    
          
           Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 11 of 34 
make recommendations about the future of the global hypertension 
clinical trial program, as well as provide advice on continued physician 
and patient access to the Symplicity technology in countries with regulatory approvals. Pending this panel review, the company intends to: 
Suspend  enrollment  in  the  3  countries  where  renal  denervation  
hypertension  trials  are  being  conducted  for  regulatory  approvals  
(SYMPLICITY  HTN -4  in  the  U.S.,  HTN -Japan  and  HTN -India).  
Begin informing clinical trial sites and  investigators,  global 
regulatory  bodies,  and  customers  of  these  ﬁndings  and  decisions.  
Continue  to  ensure  patient  access  to  the  Symplicity  technology  at 
the  discretion  of  their  physicians  in  markets  where  it  is  approved.  
Continue  the  Global  SYMPLICITY  post -market  surveillance  registry  
and  renal  denervation  studies  evaluating  other  non- hypertension  
indications.  
Ukena et al (2012) stated that sympathetic activity plays an important role 
in the pathogenesis of ventricular tachyarrhythmia. Catheter -based RDN 
is a novel treatment option for patients with resistant hypertension, proved 
to reduce local and whole -body sympathetic activity. Two patients with 
chronic heart failure (CHF) (non- obstructive hypertrophic and dilated 
cardiomyopathy, New York Heart Association [NYHA] III) suffering from 
therapy -resistant electrical storm underwent therapeutic RDN. In both 
patients, RDN was conducted with agreement of the local ethics committee and after obtaining informed consent. The pat ient with 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy had recurrent monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) despite extensive anti -arrhythmic therapy, following 
repeated endocardial and epicardial electrophysiological ablation attempts to destroy an arrhythmogenic intra- mural focus in the left 
ventricle. The second patient, with dilated non-ischemic cardiomyopathy, 
suffered from recurrent episodes of polymorphic VT and ventricular fibrillation. The patient declined catheter ablation of these tachycardias. 
In both patients, RDN was performed without procedure- related 
complications. Following RDN, ventricular tachyarrhythmias were 
significantly reduced in both patients. Blood pressure and clinical status remained stable during the procedure and follow -up in these patients with 
CHF. The authors concluded that these findings suggested that RDN is      
 
       
   
       
 
         
         
         
      
         
    
            
      
           
        
        
            
        
           
               
         
               
              
       
         
        
               
        
           
         
      
        
 
          
        
  
            
          
      
           Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 12 of 34 
feasible even in cardiac unstable patients. Moreover, they stated that 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are urgently needed to study the 
effects of RD in patients with electrical storm and CHF. 
Tsioufis (2013) reported that a small study presented at ACC 2013 has 
shown that RDN, besides reducing resistant hypertension, produces a favorable effect on atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. In the study, the 
researchers treated 14 patients with resistant hypertension who 
underwent ABPM and Holter monitoring at baseline and 1 month after 
RDN. For the procedure, the investigators used the EnligHTN ablation catheter (St Jude Medical). Patients with grade II and above of the Lown- 
Wolf classification were considered to have complex ventricular arrhythmias while the presence of greater than or equal to 3 consecutive 
premature supraventricular contractions was defined as paroxysmal atrial 
fibrillation. These researchers found that after 1 month, office and 24­hour BP was significantly reduced by 38/14.1 mmHg, p < 0.001/0.003 and 
18/9.5 mmHg, p < 0.001/0.001, respectively. Offic e heart rate was 
reduced by 7 beats per minute (bpm), (p = 0.046), ambulatory heart rate by 5.5 bpm, and average 24 -hour heart rate by 6.7 bpm (p = 0.022). The 
researchers also found that complex ventricular arrhythmias were present 
in 5 out of the 14 patients (1 with non-sustained VT and 4 with ventricular 
couplets) at baseline but persisted only in 2 of them 1 month after RDN (2 
patients with ventricular couplets). The number of premature ventricular contractions was significantly decreased after RDN (from 2.23/hour to 0.39/hour, p = 0.019). Episodes of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation were detected in 5 of 14 subjects at baseline and in 2 of those patients 1 month 
after RDN. The total number of premature supraventricular contractions 
was also significantly decreased after RDN from 1.62/hour to 0.72/hour (p 
= 0.039), the authors found. There was no relationship between the observed difference in premature supraventricular and ventricular contractions after RDN and the drop in office and 24- hour BP. 
Hoffman et al (2013) presented a case of ventricular storm (VS) in a patient with acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). After initial 
successful thrombus extraction and percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI) of the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery, a 63­
year old male patient showed recurrent monomorphic VT and ventricular 
fibrillation (VF) episodes refractory to anti- arrhythmic drug therapy. After 
initial successful VT ablation, fast VT and VF episodes remained an      
 
       
      
     
          
           
           
       
        
   
 
            
         
         
        
          
            
         
           
         
     
     
        
         
              
               
             
       
        
          
    
   
 
         
       
   
 
       
         
        Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 13 of 34 
evident problem despite maximum anti -arrhythmic drug therapy. Due to 
an increasing instability, RDN was performed. Implantable cardioverter 
defibrillator interrogation and 24- hour Holter monitoring excluded 
recurrent episodes of VT or VF at a 6- month follow -up after discharge. 
The authors concluded that this case high-lighted that RDN was effective 
and safely performed in a hemodynamically unstable patient with VS after 
STEMI and adjunct catheter ablation. They stated that RDN may open a new avenue for an adjunctive interventional bailout treatment of such highly challenging patients. 
Remo et al (2014) reported the largest case series to-date using RDN as 
adjunctive therapy for refractory VT in patients with underlying cardiomyopathy. A total of 4 patients with cardiomyopathy (2 non­ischemic, 2 ischemic) with recurrent VT despite maximized anti -
arrhythmic therapy and prior endocardial (n = 2) or endocardial/epicardial 
(n = 2) ablation underwent RDN ± repeat VT ablation. Renal denervation 
was performed spirally along each main renal artery with either a non-irrigated (6 W at 50°C for 60 seconds) or an open irrigated ablation 
catheter (10 to 12 W for 30 to 60 seconds). Renal arteriography was 
performed before and after RDN. Renal denervation was well -tolerated 
acutely and demonstrated no clinically significant complications during follow -up of 8.8 ± 2.6 months (range of 5.0 to 11.0 months). No 
hemodynamic deterioration or worsening of renal function was observed. 
The number of VT episodes was decreased from 11.0 ± 4.2 (5.0 to 14.0) 
during the month before ablation to 0.3 ± 0.1 (0.2 to 0.4) per month after 
ablation. All VT episodes occurred in the first 4 months after ablation (2.6 
± 1.5 months). The responses to RDN were similar for ischemic and non­ischemic patients. The authors concluded that this case series provided 
promising preliminary data on the safety and effectiveness of RDN as an 
adjunctive therapy in the treatment of patients with cardiom yopathy and 
VT resistant to standard interventions. 
There is an ongoing clinical trial, "RESCUE -VT" (REnal SympathetiC 
Denervation to sUpprEss Ventricular Tachyarrhythmias); this study is 
currently recruiting participants (Last verified June 2016). 
Shantha and Pancholy (2015) noted that recent evidence associates 
sympathetic tone with severity of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Renal sympathetic denervation, by decreasing sympathetic tone, has the      
 
 
    
      
   
         
           
        
       
          
       
        
    
          Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 14 of 34 
potential  to  decrease OSA severity.  Sma ll  observational studies that  
assessed  this  hypothesis  lacked precision.  In  a  meta- analysis, these 
investigators  attempted  to  pool  available  data  from  studies  that  have  
assessed  the effect  of  RDN  on OSA severity  in  patients  with OSA.  
Medline,  Embase,  Cochrane  central,  Ovid,  Cinahl,  web of  science,  and 
conference  abstracts  were  searched for  eligible  citations  by  2  
independent  reviewers  using  key  words  "renal  denervation",  
"hypertension",  and "obstructive  sleep apnea".  From  a  total  of  2,863 
identified citatio ns,  using meta- analysis  of  observational studies in  
epidemiology  method,  5 studies  were  assessed  eligible and included in  
the meta- analysis.  All  5  studies  followed an  observational  study  design,  
involved  patients  with  OSA and hypertension,  and reported  an apnea­  
hypopnea index  (AHI)  6  months  post -RDN;  4 were  "before  and after"  
studies  and 1 compared continuous  positive  airway  pressure with  RDN.  
In  the  pooled  analysis,  involving  49  patients,  RDN  was  associated  with  a 
significant  reduction  in  mean  AHI  [weighted  mean  difference  -9.61  (95  % 
CI: -15.43 to  -3.79,  p =  0.001)]  6  months  post-RDN.  One  study  also 
reported improvement  in  oxygen  desaturation  index  and  Epworth  
sleepiness  scale  score  6  months  post-RDN.  The  authors  concluded  that  
RDN  is  associated  with  significant  improvement  in  OSA  severity.  
Moreover,  they  stated  that  these  findings  need  validation  in  RCTs  that  
evaluate  the  effect  of  RDN  in  patients  with  OSA,  which  can  potentially  
broaden the clinical  applicability  of  RDN.  
Chen and U
padhyay (2017) stated that early clinical studies primarily in 
Australia and Europe established renal denervation as a well -tolerated 
and feasible procedure that resulted in a sustained reduction in BP 
among individuals with severe resistant HTN. A recent RCT in t he U.S. 
using a sham procedure in the control arm, however, did not show a significant additional benefit in BP lowering from renal denervation. This review summarized and critically examined the evidence for renal denervation in HTN management and identif ies areas for future research. 
The authors concluded that renal denervation is a potentially promising 
treatment option for drug- resistant uncontrolled HTN; future efforts should 
focus on refining the denervation technology and identifying individuals 
who are most likely to benefit from the denervation procedure.      
 
       
         
         
          
            
         
        
     
        
            
        
  
         
       
      
    
       
     
            
 
 
         
         
      
           
    
      
         
        
        
         
        
       
        
      
          
      
              
           Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 15 of 34 
Bolignano and Coppolino (2019) stated that hypertension remains a 
major public health problem and one of the most relevant causes of cardiovascular mortality and morbidity worldwide. Approximately 10 % of 
hypertensive individuals are considered as "resistant" as they are unable 
to attain and maintain optimal BP values despite the concurrent use of 3 
anti-hypertensive agents of different classes at optimal doses. As 
resistant hypertension conveys a higher risk of adverse outcomes, the search for effective treatments to properly manage this condition has progressively surged as a true health priority. The renal nerve plexus 
plays a central role in regulating arterial BP and renal sympathetic over -
activity is a major component in the development and progression of 
hypertension. On these premises, minimally -invasive catheter -based 
devices for renal nerve ablation have been developed and tested as an alternative treatment for resistant hypertension; however, clinical study 
results had been conflicting. These investigators provided a historical perspective on the scientific evidence forming the foundation of renal never ablation from accrued clinical evidence to possible fu ture 
applications. The authors concluded that more research and clinical experience is needed to fully reveal limits and potential indications of this 
procedure. 
Bohm and colleagues (2020) noted that catheter -based renal denervation 
has significantly reduced blood pressure (BP) in previous studies. 
Following a positive pilot trial, the SPYRAL HTN -OFF MED (SPYRAL 
Pivotal) Trial was designed to examine the efficacy of renal denervation in 
the absence of anti -hypertensive medications. In this international, 
prospective, single- blinded, sham -controlled trial, carried out at 44 study 
sites in Australia, Austria, Canada, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Japan, the 
United Kingdom, and the USA, hypertensive patients with office systoli c 
BP (SBP) of 150 mm Hg to less than 180 mm Hg were randomly assigned 1:1 to either a renal denervation or sham procedure. The primary efficacy end-point was baseline- adjusted change in 24-hour SBP 
and the secondary efficacy end- point was baseline- adjusted change in 
office SBP from baseline to 3 months after the procedure. These researchers used a Bayesian design with an informative prior, so the primary analysis combines evidence from the pilot and Pivotal trials. The 
primary safety and efficacy analyses were performed in the intention- to­
treat (ITT) population. From June 25, 2015 to October 15, 2019, a total of 
331 patients were randomly assigned to either renal denervation (n =      
 
         
        
      
        
       
     
   
    
         
  
 
   
          
      
      
            
   
         
       
    
          
     
        
      
       
      
        
      
        
          
            
     
 
          
        
        
       
       
       Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 16 of 34 
166) or a sham procedure (n = 165). The primary and secondary efficacy 
end-points were met, with posterior probability of superiority more than 
0.999 for both. The treatment difference between the 2 groups for 24­hour SBP was -3.9 mm Hg (Bayesian 95 % credible interval [CI]: -6.2 to 
-1.6) and for office SBP the difference was -6.5 mm Hg ( -9.6 to -3.5). No 
major device- related or procedural -related safety adverse events (AEs) 
occurred up to 3 months. The authors concluded that the SPYRAL Pivotal Trial showed the superiority of catheter -based rena l denervation 
compared with a sham procedure to safely lower BP in the absence of 
anti-hypertensive medications. 
The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. Blood 
pressure assessment in patients not treated with medications was limited 
to 3 months to avoid prolonging medication withdrawal. Because previous trials have shown an increasing treatment effect between 3 
months and 6 months, this shorter duration might have resulted in under ­
estimation of the treatment effect. Not all patients followed protocol 
requirements to stay off medications, as assessed by drug and urine 
testing; although results in the per -protocol cohort were consistent with 
the ITT results. An intra -procedural indicator of successful renal 
denervation is not available for operator feedback. Patients with a history 
of heart failure (HF), cerebrovascular accident (CVA) or transient ischemic attack (TIA), or atrial fibrillation (AF) were excluded from the study because these patients require medications such as renin­
angiotensin- aldosterone system inhibitors for secondary prevention of 
hypertension, and it would have been unethical to withhold these 
medications. Furthermore, although not all patients had primary efficacy end-point observations available (often related to meeting protocol -
specified criteria for resuming medications, and more commonly observed 
in the sham group), the efficacy analyses were consistent when multiple imputation for missing values was performed. It should also be noted that 
this trial was sponsored by Medtronic. 
Stavropoulos and associates (2020) stated that despite the availability of 
a numerous anti-hypertensive agents, hypertension treatment and control 
rates remain low in many countries. The role of the SNS has long been 
recognized, but recent sham control renal denervation studies 
demonstrated conflicting results. In a systematic review and meta-
analysis, these researchers examined outcomes of sham -controlled      
 
      
       
       
     
          
              
        
         
       
               
           
                 
        
      
          
          
       
       
         
     
          
     
 
    
              
            
      
        
     
 
 
 
             
         
      
         
      
          
          Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 17 of 34 
studies utilizing new technologies and procedures; 6 published 
randomized, sham -controlled studies were included in this meta -analysis. 
Of those, 3 trials used the first -generation RF renal denervation device 
and technique and the other 3 used second- generation devices and 
techniques. A total of 981 patients with hypertension were randomized in 
all 6 trials to undergo renal denervation (n = 585) or sham procedure (n = 
396). Overall, renal denervation resulted in a decrease of 24- hours 
systolic ABP by 3.62 mm Hg (95 % CI: -5.28 to - 1.96; I2 = 0 %), 
compared to sham procedure (GRADE: low). Renal denervation also 
reduced day -time systolic ABP by 5.51 mm Hg (95 % CI: -7.79 to -3.23; I2 
= 0 %), compared to sham procedure but not night -time systolic ABP. 
Office SBP was reduced by 5.47 mm Hg (95 % CI -8.10 to -2.84; I2 = 0 
%), compared to sham control. Further analysis demonstrated that 
second- generation devices were effective in reducing BP, whereas the 
first-generation devices were not. The authors concluded that results of 
this meta‐analysis suggested that renal denervation worked in the short -
term and may contribute to better management and control of 
uncontrolled hypertension. Nonetheless, the effect was relatively small and most likely diluted by non
‐responders. Moreover, these researchers 
stated that further, well ‐designed studies (larger, adequately powered 
RCTs) are needed to better -define the role of renal denervation in the 
treatment of hypertension in the general population. 
The authors stated that the drawbacks of this study included the small 
number of the included RCTs (n = 6), the relatively small sample size (n = 
981), the short -term follow‐up period (up to 6 months), and small number 
of studies. Furthermore, these investigators did not carry out meta ‐
regression analyses for the investigation of the observed heterogeneity, 
due to the small number of included trials. 
Treatment of Heart Failure 
Booth et al (2015) noted that sympathetic drive, especially to the heart, is 
elevated in heart failure (HF) and is strongly associated with poor 
outcome. The mechanisms causing the increased sympathetic drive to the heart remain poorly understood. Catheter -based RDN, which reduces 
BP and sympathetic drive in hypertensive patients, is a potential 
treatment in HF. These researchers investigated the short -term effects of 
catheter -based RDN on BP, heart rate (HR) and cardiac sympathetic      
 
        
          
    
       
        
       
      
            
             
       
           
        
          
             
   
            
 
 
        
        
              
         
          
        
        
          
        
    
        
         
      
        
         
      
      
           
           Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 18 of 34 
nerve activity (CSNA) and on baroreflex function in a conscious, large 
animal model of HF. Adult Merino ewes were paced into heart failure 
(ejection fraction<40%) and then instrumented to directly record CSNA. The resting levels and baroreflex control of C SNA and HR were 
measured before and 24h after bilateral renal (n=6) or sham (n=6) denervation; RDN was performed using the Symplicity Flex Catheter 
System
® (Medtronic) using the same algorithm as in patients. Catheter -
based RDN significantly reduced resting diastolic BP (p < 0.01) and mean 
arterial BP (p < 0.05), but did not change resting HR or CSNA compared 
with sham denervation. Renal denervation reduced the BP at which 
CSNA was at 50 % of maximum (BP50; p < 0.005) compared with sham denervation. The authors concluded that in an ovine model of HF, 
catheter -based RDN did not reduce resting CSNA in the short -term. 
There was, however, a lack of a reflex increase in CSNA in response to 
the fall in arterial BP due to a leftward shift in the baroreflex control of 
CSNA, which may be due to denervation of renal efferent and/or afferent 
nerves. 
Dai and colleagues (2015) examined the feasibility and effects of percutaneous renal sympathetic nerve RF ablation in patients with HF. A 
total of 20 patients with HF were enrolled, aged from 47 to 75 (63 ± 10) 
years. They were divided into the standard therapy (n = 10), and renal 
nerve RF ablation groups (n = 10). There were 15 males and 5 female patients; including 8 ischemic cardiomyopathy, 8 dilated cardiomyopathy, 
and 8 hypertensive cardiopathy. All of the patients met the criteria of NYHA classes III to IV cardiac function. Patients with diabetes and renal 
failure were excluded. Percutaneous renal sympathetic nerve RF ablation 
was performed on the renal artery wall under X -ray guidance. Serum 
electrolytes, neurohormones, and 24- hour urine volume were recorded 24 
hours before and after the operation. Echocardiograms were performed to 
obtain left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) at baseline and 6 months. 
Symptoms of dyspnea and edema, BP, and HR were also monitored. 
After renal nerve ablation, 24- hour urine volume was increased, while 
neurohormone levels were decreased compared with those of pre­
operation and standard ther apy. No obvious change in HR or BP was 
recorded. Symptoms of HF were improved in patients after the operation. 
No complications were recorded in the study. The authors concluded that      
 
        
         
          
 
 
 
       
           
      
       
          
            
     
      
        
       
        
   
           
        
      
       
     
      
    
        
      
         
    
          
         
 
 
          
          
           
          
           
       Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 19 of 34 
percutaneous renal sympathetic nerve RF ablation may be a feasible, 
safe, and effective treatment for the patients with severe congestive HF. 
These preliminary findings need to be validated by well -designed studies. 
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Chronic Renal Failure 
Thorp and Schlaich (2015) noted that animal and human studies have shown that chronic activation of renal sympathetic nerves is critical in the 
pathogenesis and perpetuation of treatment -resistant hypertension. 
Bilate ral renal denervation has emerged as a non- pharmacological 
treatment for resistant hypertension that involves the selective ablation of 
efferent and afferent renal nerves to lower BP. However, the most recent 
and largest RCT failed to confirm the effectiveness of renal denervation 
over a sham procedure, prompting widespread re -evaluation of the 
therapy's efficacy. Disrupting renal afferent sympathetic signaling to the 
hypothalamus with renal denervation lowers central sympathetic tone, 
which has the potential to confer additional clinical benefits beyond BP control. Specifically, there has been substantial interest in the use of renal denervation as either a primary or adjunct therapy in pathological 
conditions characterized by central sympathetic over-activity (e.g., renal 
disease, HF and metabolic -associated disorders). Recent findings from 
pre-clinical and proof -of-concept studies appeared promising with renal 
denervation shown to confer cardiovascular and metabolic benefits, 
largely independent of changes in BP. These investigators explored the 
pathological rationale for targeting sympathetic renal nerves for BP control. They discussed latest developments in renal nerve ablation modalities designed to improve procedural success along with prospect ive findings on the efficacy of renal denervation to lower BP in 
treatment -resistant hypertensive patients. The authors presented 
preliminary evidence in support of renal denervation as a possible therapeutic option in disease states characterized by central sympathetic 
over-activity. 
Barrett (2015) examined the role played by renal sympathetic nerves in 
the regulation of cardiovascular function, focusing on changes that occur 
during the development of hypertension and HF. While elevated levels of 
renal sympathetic activity (RSA) are a feature of many cardiovascular 
diseases, the relationship is not straightforward, especially in the case of 
hypertension. These researchers noted that before consideration of      
 
        
             
         
         
    
       
         
         
   
       
       
          
     
          
        
      
             
         
    
        
          
 
 
        
          
    
       
      
            
         
   
        
        
       
      
       
         
        
        Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 20 of 34 
targeting the renal nerves in the clinical management of cardiovascular 
diseases it is essential that their role in the development of the disease is 
established. In recent years, with the development of new clinical techniques to target the renal nerves specifically, researchers have seen 
a renewed interest in the role of the renal sympathetic nerves in the development of cardiovascular diseases. In understanding the potential of renal nerve ablation for the treatment of cardiovascular disease, first the role played by these nerves in cardiovascular regulation must be determined. Elevated RSA not only has the potential to increase fluid 
retention but may also act in a feed- forward manner to increase 
sympathetic activation further, increasing the workload of the heart and 
the potential for arrhythmias. Direct recordings of RSA in animal models of hypertension and renal noradrenaline spill -over levels in individual 
patients with hypertension have illustrated that hypertension is not always 
accompanied by an increase in RSA. Elevated RSA is a feature of severe HF, but whether removal of the renal nerves then compromises 
the ability to maintain cardiac function when faced with a stressor such as 
sepsis remains unclear. The authors concluded that understanding when 
increased renal sympathetic drive is contributing to the progression of 
cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension and HF would appear to 
be the key to understanding when renal nerve ablation is likely to be of benefit. 
Oparil and Schmieder (2015) stated that hypertension is the most common modifiable risk factor for cardiovascular disease and death; and 
lowering BP with anti -hypertensive drugs reduces target organ damage 
and prevents cardiovascular disease outcomes. Despite a plethora of 
available therapeutic options, a substantial portion of the hypertensive 
population has uncontrolled BP. The unmet need of controlling BP in this 
population may be addressed, in part, by developing new drugs and devices/procedures to treat hypertension and its co-morbidities. These 
investigators discussed new drugs and interventional treatments that are 
undergoing pre- clinical or clinical testing for hypertension treatment. New 
drug classes (e.g., inhibitors of vasopeptidases, aldosterone synthase and soluble epoxide hydrolase, agonists of natriuretic peptide A and vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor 2, and a novel mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist) are in phase II/III of development, while inhibitors of 
aminopeptidaseA, dopamine β-hydroxylase, and the intestinal Na(+)/H(+) 
exchanger 3, agonists of components of the angiotensin-converting      
 
      
          
        
          
     
           
         
        
     
            
        
 
 
        
        
      
      
          
        
 
 
 
          
          
         
            
    
       
   
       
         
        
     
     
        
   
     
        
            Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 21 of 34 
enzyme 2/angiotensin(1- 7)/Mas receptor axis and vaccines directed 
toward angiotensin II and its type 1 receptor are in phase I or pre- clinical 
development. The 2 main interventional approaches, trans -catheter renal 
denervation and baroreflex activation therapy, are used in clinical practice 
for severe treatment -resistant hypertension in some countries. The 
authors stated that renal denervation is also being evaluated for treatment 
of various co -morbidities (e.g., CHF, cardiac arrhythmias and chronic 
renal failure). Novel interventional approaches in early development 
include carotid body ablation and arterio -venous fistula placement. They 
noted that none of these novel drug or device treatments has been shown 
to prevent cardiovascular disease outcomes or death in hypertensive patients. 
Also, UpToDate reviews on "Overview of the management of chronic kidney disease in adults" (Rosenberg, 2016), "Arrhythmia management 
for the primary care clinician" (Levy and Olshansky, 2016), and "Treatment of symptomatic arrhythmias associated with the Wolff -
Parkinson -White syndrome" (Di Biase and Walsh, 2016) do not mention 
renal denervation/renal nerve ablati on as a therapeutic option. 
Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction 
Feng and colleagues (2017) evaluated the therapeutic effects of RDN on 
acute MI in canines and explored its possible mechanisms of action. A total of 18 healthy mongrel dogs were randomly assigned to either the 
control group, the MI group or the MI + RDN group. To assess cardiac 
function, LVEF, left ventricular end- diastol ic dimension (LVEDD), left 
ventricular end-systolic dimension (LVESD) and fraction shortening (FS) 
were recorded. Additionally, hemodynamic parameters such as left 
ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP), left ventricular end-diastolic pressure 
(LVEDP) and HR were measured. Cardiac oxidative stress levels were evaluated based on the expression of p47phox mRNA, malondialdehyde 
(MDA), anti -superoxide anion free radical (ASAFR) and activity of 
superoxide dismutase (SOD). To measure the local activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and renin -angiotensin system (RAS), 
the levels of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), angiotensin II (AngII), angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), angiotensin (1- 7) [Ang(1- 7)] 
and Mas receptor (MasR) in myocardial tissues were recorded. The expression of TH in renal tissue and serum creatinine were used to      
 
 
 
 
 
       
     
         Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 22 of 34 
assess  the  effectiveness  of  the RDN  procedure  and renal  function,  
respectively.  These  researchers  found  that  MI  deteriorated  heart  function  
and activated cardiac  oxidative  stress  and the local  neuro -humoral  
system,  while  RDN  partially  reversed  these  changes.  Compared  with  the 
control  group,  parameters  including LVEDD,  LVESD,  LVEDP and the 
levels  of  ASAFR,  MDA,  p47phox,ACE2,  Ang(1 -7),  MasR,  AngII  and TH - 
positive  nerves  were  increased  (all  p <  0.05)  in  myocardial  infracted  dogs;  
meanwhile,  LVEF,  FS,  LVSP  and  SOD  expression  were  decreased  (all  p  
<  0.05).  However,  after  RDN  therapy,  these  changes  were  significantly  
improved (p <  0.05),  except  that  there  were no  significant  differences  
observed  in  FS or  LVSP between the 2  groups  (p =  0.092 and  0.931,  
respectively).  More  importantly,  the  expression  of  TH,  AngII  and  Ang(1 -7) 
was  positively  correlated with  MDA and negatively  correlated with  SOD.  
Between -group  comparisons  demonstrated no differences  in  serum  
creatinine (p =  0.706).  The authors  concluded  that  RDN  attenuated  
cardiac  re-modelling  and  improved  heart  function  by  decreasing  the  level  
of  cardiac  oxidative stress  and the  local  activity  of  the SNS and RAS in 
cardiac tissues. Additionally, the safety  of the RDN  procedure w  as  
established,  as  no  significant  decrease  in  LVSP or  rise in  serum  
creatinine was  observed  in  this  study.  Moreover,  these  investigators  
stated  that  to  confirm  the  validity  of  these  results,  studies  both  in  humans  
and animals  should  be undertaken  on a  larger  scale  and with  a longer  
observation  time.  
This  study  had several  drawbacks:  (i) MI  was only validated  by the  
pathological specimen and echocardiography, and these researchers  
did not evaluate the infarct size, which reduced the  persuasion to a  
certain extent, (ii) the number of subjects was not large enough (n = 
18),  which   may   have  aﬀected   the  statistical analysis,   (iii)  due  to  lack  of  
a control + RDN group, the eﬀects of the int ervention could not be  
excluded completely, and  (iv) the observation time was short (4 
weeks).  
Treatment of Chronic Kidney -Related Pain 
Casale and colleagues (2008) presented their medium -term experience 
with laparoscopic RDN and nephropexy for autosomal dominant 
polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) -related pain in the pediatric patient.      
 
          
         
         
            
          
            
      
        
          
        
 
    
            
        
    
     
    
     
        
       
       
       
       
           
      
          
           
     
          
 
         
      
     
            
       
       
   Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 23 of 34 
A total of 12 patients aged 8 to 19 years (mean age of 12.4 years) with 
ADPKD presented with chronic pain refractory to narcotic analgesics were enrolled in this study. These subjects underwent laparoscopic RDN 
of 16 kidneys. Mean operative time was 152 minutes and mean hospital 
stay was 2.17 days. All patients were pain-free at discharge and remain pain-free at a mean follow -up of 25.5 months; 3 adolescent patients each 
had an episode of flank pain. One was associated with pyelonephritis, another with stones, and the third with trauma and a hematoma. The authors concluded that laparoscopic RDN and nephropexy is a promising 
option for pediatric patients with uncontrolled ADPKD -related pain. 
Gambaro and co- workers (2013) stated that loin pain hematuria 
syndrome (LPHS) is a severe renal pain condition of uncertain origin and 
often resistant totreatment. Nephrectomy and renal auto-transplantation 
have occasionally been performed in very severe cases. Its 
pathogenesis is controversial. In this study, a 40- year old hypertensive 
woman was diagnosed with LPHS after repeated diagnostic imaging 
procedures had ruled out any renal, abdominal or spinal conditions to justify pain. Notwithstanding treatment with 3 drugs, she had frequent hypertensive crises during which the loin pain was dramatically 
exacerbated. Vascular causes of the pain and hypertension were 
investigated and excluded. Her renal function was normal. The patient was referred to a multi -disciplinary pain clinic, but had no significant 
improvement in her pain symptoms despite the use of non- steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), adjuvant anti-depressants and opioid- like 
agents. The pain and the discomfort were so severe that her quality of life (QOL) was very poor, and her social and professional activities were 
compromised. Nephrectomy and renal auto- transplantation have 
occasionally been performed in these cases. Since visceral pain signals 
flow through afferent sympathetic fibers, these investigators felt that percutaneous catheter -based RF ablation of the renal sympathetic nerve 
fibers (recently introduced for the treatment of drug- resistant 
hypertension) could be valuable for pain relief. They treated the patient with RF ablation applied only to the right renal artery. After a 6- month 
follow -up, the patient was pain-free and normotensive with all drugs 
withdrawn. She experienced no hypertensive crises in themeant ime. 
The authors concluded that this observation suggested that      
 
          
           
 
 
        
           
       
        
         
         
              
      
         
   
     
       
     
       
           
     
           
       
         
          
     
 
      
         
          
       
         
         
         
          
  
 
             
          
         Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 24 of 34 
percutaneous sympathetic RF denervation could prove to be an effective 
mini-invasive strategy for the treatment of chronic renal pain, and LPHS in 
particular. 
de Beus and colleagues (2013) stated that RDN using a catheter 
delivering RF energy to the renal artery vessel wall has recently emerged 
as a promising new treatment for difficult -to-treat hypertension. The 
beneficial effect of this intervention, attributable to sympathetic nerves interruption, has been coherently demonstrated in both an observational 
study and a controlled trial. Of note, according to the available follow -up 
studies, the hypotensive effect of RDN has been shown to last for up to 2 
to 3 years. The European Society of Hypertension has published a position paper with recommendations for the application of this new technique including the eligibility criteria and issues that need to be addressed in further trials. Several other condit ions associated with 
sympathetic over -activity as diverse as HF, atrial fibrillation (AF), insulin 
resistance, sleep apnea and polycystic ovary syndrome have been described as being responsive to RDN and/or are being subjected to further study. Renal dener vation has become a hot topic as illustrated by 
the large number of ongoing and planned trials of the technique. In this issue, Gambaro et al (2013) described the use of catheter -based RDN for 
yet another indication, namely pain control in LPHS. The author s 
concluded that application of catheter -based RDN should be subjected to 
a properly conducted clinical trial in order to provide definitive evidence for its effectiveness, or otherwise, in LPHS. 
Casteleijn and associates (2014) noted that chronic pain is a common 
concern in patients with ADPKD. These investigators reported, to their best knowledge, the first catheter -based RDN procedure in a patient with 
ADPKD resulting in successful management of chronic pain. The patient was a 43- year old woman whose chronic pain could not be controlled by 
pain medication or splanchnic nerve blockade. Transluminal RF RDN was performed as an experimental therapeutic option with an excellent result, indicating that this procedure should be considered for chronic pain 
management in ADPKD. 
Riccio and colleagues (2014) described a case of RDN in a woman with 
single -kidney stage 4 chronic kidney disease secondary to ADPKD and 
uncontrolled treatment -resistant hypertension. Due to failure of all other      
 
         
         
     
          
     
       
     
     
            
        
    
 
         
        
      
      
           
        
          
        
       
       
         
        
         
     
        
         
           
           
        
        
        
         
    
 
         
         
      Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 25 of 34 
therapeutic strategies, including uni-nephrectomy, RDN by RF ablation of 
the single renal artery was performed. After the procedure, the patient’s 
BP declined remarkably, decreasing her need for anti -hypertensive 
medication. Moreover, the patient did not experience a significant decline 
in kidney function. Furthermore, the authors noted that several studies supported the safety and efficacy of RDN. However, the existing 
evidence was limited by small studies and short -term follow -up. They 
stated that a large trial, recently completed but not yet published (at the time of writing), as well as ongoing clinical trials, should provide important 
information regarding the safety and efficacy of RDN for resistant hypertension or other indications. 
Casteleijn and co- workers (2017) stated that ADPKD patients can suffer 
from chronic pain that can be refractory to conventional treatment, resulting in a wish for nephrectomy. These investigators examined the effect of a multi -disciplinary treatment protoc ol with sequential nerve 
blocks on pain relief in ADPKD patients with refractory chronic pain. As a first-step a diagnostic, temporary celiac plexus block with local 
anesthetics was performed. If substantial pain relief was obtained, the assumption was that pain was relayed via the celiac plexus and major 
splanchnic nerves. When pain recurred, patients were then scheduled for 
a major splanchnic nerve block with RF ablation. In cases with no pain relief, it was assumed that pain was relayed via the aortico-r enal plexus, 
and catheter -based RDN was performed. A total of 60 patients were 
referred, of which 44 were eligible. In 36 patients, the diagnostic celiac 
plexus block resulted in substantial pain relief with a change in the 
median visual analog scale (VAS) score pre- post intervention of 50/100. 
Of these patients, 23 received a major splanchnic nerve block because pain recurred, with a change in median VAS pre- post block of 53/100. In 
8 patients without pain relief after the diagnostic block, RDN was 
perform ed in 5, with a borderline significant change in the median VAS 
pre-post intervention of 20/100. After a median follow -up of 12 months, 
81.8 % of the patients experienced a sustained improvement in pain 
intensity, indicating that the treatment protocol was effective in obtaining 
pain relief in ADPKD patients with refractory chronicpain. 
de Jager and colleagues (2018) noted that LPHS and ADPKD are the most important non- urological conditions to cause chronic severe kidney -
related pain. Multi -disciplinary programs and surgical methods have      
 
 
       
          
          
        
       
         
       
         
       
          
           
         
    
    
    
        
               Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 26 of 34 
shown  inconsistent  results  with  respect  to  pain  reduction.  Percutaneous  
catheter -based  RDN  could  be  a  less  invasive  therapeutic  option  for  these 
patients.  These  researchers  examined  the  change  in  perceived  pain  and 
use  of  analgesic  medication  from  baseline  to 3,  6 and  12 months  after  
RDN.  Patients  with  LPHS or  ADPKD,  who experienced  kidney -related 
pain  for  greater  than or  equal  to  3 months  with  a  VAS score of  greater  
than or  equal  to 50/100 were included in this trial. Percutaneous  RDN  
was  performed with  a  single- electrode RF  ablation  catheter.  Renal  
denervation was  performed in  11 patients  (6 with LPHS  and  5 with 
ADPKD).  Perceived pain  declined in  the whole  group by  23 mm(p =   
0.12  for  the  total  group).  In  patients  with  LPHS  and  ADPKD,  the  median  
daily  defined dosage of  analgesic  medication decreased  from  1.6  [inter ­ 
quartile  range  (IQR)  0.7  to  2.3]  and  1.4  (IQR  0.0  to7.4)  at  baseline  to  0.3 
(IQR  0.0  to  1.9;  p =  0.138)  and  0.0  (IQR  0.0  to  0.8;  p =  0.285)  at  12 months,  
respectively.  Mean estimated glomerular  filtration rate (eGFR)  
decreased  in  the whole  group by  5.4 ml/min/1.73  m2 at  6 months  
compared with  baseline  (p =  0.163).  The authors  concluded that  these  
findings  suggested  that  percutaneous  catheter -based  RDN  reduced  pain 
complaints  and  the  use  of  analgesic  medication  in  patients  with  LPHS  or 
ADPKD.  Moreover, they  stated that these results can serve as the  
rationale  for  a  larger,  preferably  randomized  (sham)  controlled  study.  
Prasad 
and associates (2018) stated that LPHS is characterized by 
severe unilateral or bilateral loin pain that suggests a renal origin but 
occurs in the absence of identifiable or relevant urinary tract disease. Hematuria can either be microscopic or macroscopic, but the renal 
abnormalities responsible for the hematuria are unexplained. Debilitating 
pain refractory to conventional pain medications is the main cause of 
morbidity. In a single -arm, single -center study, 12 patients between the 
ages of 21 and 62 years (11 women, 1 man) with LPHS underwent endovascular ablation of the renal nerves between July 2015 and 
November 2016, using the Vessix renal denervation system. The primary 
objective was to achieve 30 % reduction in self -reported pain with the 
McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ) at 6 months. The secondary objectives 
were to measure changes in disability (Oswestry Disability Index [ODI]), 
mood (Geriatric Depression Scale [GDS]), and QOL (EuroQol -5D [EQ ­
5D] and the MOS 36- Item Short Form Survey [SF -36]) scores from 
baseline to 6 months post -procedure; 10 of 12 patients at 3 months and 
11 of 12 patients at 6 months reported a greater than 30 % reduction in      
 
        
    
      
          
      
            
      
 
           
          
           
            
          
       
   
        
    
       
        
      
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 27 of 34 
pain based on the MPQ at 3 and 6 months. These researchers found 
consistent improvements in MPQ, ODI, GDS, EQ- 5D, and SF -36 scores 
from baseline to 6 months post -procedure. The authors concluded that 
RDN was associated with a considerable improvement in pain, disability, 
QOL, and mood. These findings suggested that perc utaneous catheter -
based delivery of RF energy is a safe, rapid therapeutic option that should 
be considered in all patients with LPHS. 
The authors stated that results of this study would no doubt have to be 
followed- up with a RCT involving a sham group. Nevertheless, the initial 
improvement in pain observed in these patients opened up the possibility 
of conducting further clinical studies of LPHS with RDN as the treatment 
modality. Also, long-term clinical studies are needed to fully evaluate the 
beneficial effects of RDN. The negative results associated with RDN in BP trials, venoplasty in multiple sclerosis, vertebroplasty for wedge compression fractures, use of percutaneous laser myocardial re­
vascularization, cardio -inhibitory syncope with implantation of a 
pacemaker, and intra-articular injection of anti -inflammatory medications 
should temper one’s enthusiasm regarding the apparently positive results 
to be proved only to have a sham impact. 
CPT Codes/ HCPCS Codes/ICD -10 Codes
Information in the [brackets] below has been added for clarification 
purposes. Codes requiring a 7th character are represented by “+” 
Code Code Description 
CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB : 
Radiofrequency ablation of the renal sympathetic nerve : 
No specific code 
Code Code Description 
0338T  - 
0339T  Transcatheter  renal  sympathetic  denervation,  
percutaneous  approach including arterial  puncture,  
selective catheter  placement(s)  renal  artery(ies),  
fluoroscopy,  contrast injection(s), intraprocedural  
roadmapping  and radiological  supervision  and 
interpretation,  including pressure  gradient  
measurements,  flush  aortogram  and  diagnostic  renal  
angiography  when performed       
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
       
       
  
             
      
 
        
  
    
    
       
       
  
         
      
  Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 28 of 34 
ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB (not all 
inclusive)  :  
G47.33  Obstructive  sleep  apnea (adult)  (pediatric)  
G89.29  Other  chronic  pain  [kidney -related]  
I10 - I16.2  Hypertensive  disease  
I21.01 - 
I21.4  ST  elevation  (STEMI)  and  non-ST  elevation  NSTEMI 
myocardial  infarction  
I47.0 - I47.9  Paroxysmal tachycardia  
I48.0 - 
I48.92  Atrial fibrillation and flutter  
I49.01 - 
I49.9  Other  cardiac  arrhythmias  
N18.1 - 
N18.9  Chronic kidney  disease  
N23  Unspecified  renal  colic  [chronic kidney -related  pain]  
The above policy is based on the following references: 
1. Bakris GL, Townsend RR, Liu M, et al; SYMPLICITY HTN -3 
Investigators. Impact of renal denervation on 24-hour 
ambulatory blood pressure: Results from SYMPLICITY HTN -3. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64(11):1071 -1078. 
2. Barrett CJ. Renal sympathetic nerves -what have they got to do 
with cardiovascular disease? Exp Physiol. 2015;100(4):359 -365. 
3. Bhatt DL, Kandzari DE, O'Neill WW, et al; SYMPLICITY HTN -3 
Investigators. A controlled trial of renal denervation for resistant 
hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(15):1393 -1401. 
4. Bohm M, Kario K, Kandzari DE, et al, SPYRAL HTN -OFF MED 
Pivotal Investigators.  Eﬃcacy  of catheter -based renal 
denervation in the absenc e of antihypertensive medications 
(SPYRAL HTN -OFF MED Pivotal): A multicentre, randomised, 
sham -controlled trial. Lancet. 2020;395:1444 -1451. 
5. Bolignano D, Coppolino G. Renal nerve ablation for resistant 
hypertension:  Facts,  ﬁctions  and future  directions. Rev 
Cardiovasc Med. 2019;20(1):9 -18.      
    
      
         
 
  
       
  
 
            
        
  
  
  
 
        
      
   
         
  
           
       
        
           
         
 
            
       
  
          
      
 
  
      
        
            
 
    
       
        
  Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 29 of 34 
6. Booth LC, Schlaich MP, Nishi EE, et al. Short -term  eﬀects  of 
catheter -based renal denervation on cardiac sympathetic drive 
and cardiac  baroreﬂex  function  in heart  failure.  Int J Cardiol. 
2015;190:220 -226. 
7. Casale P, Meyers K, Kaplan B. Follow -up for laparoscopic renal 
denervation andnephropexy forautosomal dominant polycystic 
kidney disease -related pain in pediatrics. J Endourol. 
2008;22(5):991 -993. 
8. Casteleijn NF, de Jager RL, Neeleman MP, et al. Chronic kidney 
 
pain in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: A case 
report of successful treatment by catheter -based renal 
denervation. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;63(6):1019 -1021. 
 
9. Casteleijn NF, van Gastel MD, Blankestijn PJ, et al; DIPAK 
 
Consortium. Novel treatment protocol for ameliorating 
 
refractory, chronic pain in patients with autosomal dominant 
 
polycystic kidney disease. Kidney Int. 2017;91(4):972 -981. 
 
10. Chen C, Upadhyay A. Renal denervation for uncontrolled 
hypertension: Critical review of the evidence. Curr Opin Nephrol 
Hypertens. 2017;26(2):114 -122. 
11. Dai Q,  Lu J, Wang  B, Ma G. Eﬀect  of percutaneous  renal 
sympathetic nerve radiofrequency ablation in patients with 
severe heart failure. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015;8(6):9779 -9785. 
12. de Beus E, Blankestijn PJ, Fox JG, Zoccali C. Catheter -based renal 
denervation as a novel treatment for loin pain haematuria 
syndrome. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28(9):2197 -2199. 
13. de Jager RL, Casteleijn NF, de Beus E, et al. Catheter -based renal 
denervation as therapy for chronic severe kidney -related pain. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2018;33(4):614 -619. 
14. Denker MG, Cohen DL. Resistant hypertension and renal nerve 
denervation. Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J. 2015;11(4):240 ­
244. 
15. Di Biase L, Walsh EP. Treatment of symptomatic arrhythmias 
associated withthe Wolﬀ -Parkinson -White syndrome. UpToDate 
[online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed July 2016. 
16. Esler M, Guo L. The future of renal denervation. Auton Neurosci. 
2017;204:131 -138. 
17. Esler MD, Krum H, Schlaich M, et al. Renal sympathetic 
denervation fortreatment of drug -resistant hypertension: One -
year results from the Symplicity HTN -2 randomized, controlled 
trial. Circulation. 2012;126( 25):2976 -2982.      
            
  
 
  
  
         
 
 
 
 
        
  
    
     
      
           
         
         
    
          
        
       
   
  
       
 
 
       
  
         
      
          
 
      
  
          
  
   
       
      Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 30 of 34 
18. Fadl Elmula FE, Hoﬀmann  P, Larstorp AC, et al. Adjusted drug 
treatment is superior to renal sympathetic denervation in 
patients with true treatment -resistant hypertension. 
Hypertension. 2014;63(5):991 -999. 
19. Feng Q, Lu C, Wang L, et al. Eﬀects of renal denervation on  
cardiac oxidative stress and local activity of the sympathetic 
nervous system and renin -angiotensin system in acute 
myocardial infracted dogs. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 
2017;17(1):65. 
20. Gambaro G, Fulignati P, Spinelli A, et al. Percutaneous renal 
sympathetic nerve ablation for loin pain haematuria syndrome. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28(9):2393 -2395. 
21. Geisler BP, Egan BM, Cohen JT, et al. Cost -eﬀectiveness  and 
clinical eﬀectiveness  of catheter -based renal denervation for 
resistant hypertension. J AmCollCardiol. 2012;60(14):1271 -1277. 
22. Hoﬀmann  BA, Steven D, Willems S, Sydow K. Renal sympathetic 
denervation as an adjunct to catheter ablation for the treatment 
of ventricular electrical storm in the setting of acute myocardial 
infarction. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2013;24(10):1175 -1178. 
23. Kandzari DE, Bhatt DL, Sobotka PA, et al. Catheter -based renal 
denervation for resistant hypertension: Rationale and design of 
the SYMPLICITY HTN -3 Trial. Clin Cardiol. 2012;35(9):528 -535. 
24. Krum H, Schlaich M, Whitbourn R, et al. Catheter -based renal 
sympathetic denervation for resistant hypertension: A 
multicentre safety and proof -of-principle cohort study. Lancet. 
2009;373(9671):1275 -1281. 
25. Levy S, Olshansky B. Arrhythmia management for the primary 
care clinician. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; 
reviewed July 2016. 
26. Lobodzinski SS. New developments in the treatment of severe 
drug resistant hypertension. Cardiol J. 2011;18(6):707 -711. 
27. Mahfoud F, Vonend O, Bruck H, et al; DeutscheGesellschaft für 
Hypertonie und Prävention. Expert consensus statement on 
interventional renal sympatheticdenervation forhypertension 
treatment. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2011;136(47):2418. 
28. McBryde FD, Hart EC, Ramchandra R, Paton JF. Evaluating the 
carotid bodies and renal nerves as therapeutic targets for 
hypertension. Auton Neurosci. 2017;204:126 -130. 
29. Medtronic. Medtronic announces U.S. renal denervation pivotal 
trial fails to meet  primary eﬃcacy endpoint  while  meeting      
        
 
          
  
      
       
   
   
 
        
  
          
  
  
         
          
  
             
 
 
        
       
  
           
  
  
         
   
 
  
        
   
 
          
  
 
          
  
   Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 31 of 34 
primary safety. Press Release. Fridley, MN: Medtronic; January 9, 
2014. 
30. Mundy L, Hiller J. Renal sympathetic denervation for the 
treatment of resistant hypertension. Horizon 
Scanning Technology Prioritising Summary. Australia and New 
Zealand Horizon Scanning Network. Canberra, ACT: Adelaide 
Health Technology; March, 2010. 
31. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE). 
Percutaneous transluminal radiofrequency sympathetic 
denervation of the renal artery for resistant hypertension.NICE 
Interventional Procedure Guidance 418. London, UK: NICE; 
January 2012. 
32. National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Library of Medicine 
(NLM). Renal sympathetic denervation to suppress 
tachyarrhythmias in ICD recipients (RESCUE). ClinicalTrial.gov. 
No. NCT01747837. Bethesda, MD: NLM; last veriﬁed  June 2017. 
33. Oparil S, Schmieder RE. New approaches in the treatment of 
hypertension. Circ Res. 2015;116(6):1 074-1095. 
34. Ott C, Mahfoud F, Schmid A, et al. Renal denervation in moderate 
treatment -resistant hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;62(20):1880 -1886. 
35. Papademetriou  V, Doumas  M, Tsiouﬁs  K. Renal sympathetic  
denervation for the treatment of diﬃcult -to-control or resistant 
hypertension. Int J Hypertens. 2011; 2011. 
36. Patel RA, White CJ. Renal intervention to treat hypertension. Curr 
Cardiol Rep. 2012;14(2):142 -149. 
37. Prasad B, Giebel S, Garcia F, et al. Successful use of renal 
denervation in patie nts with loin pain hematuria syndrome -The 
Regina Loin Pain Hematuria Syndrome Study. Kidney Int Rep. 
2018;3(3):638 -644. 
38. Remo BF, Preminger M, Bradﬁeld J, et al. Safety and eﬃcacy of  
renal denervation as a novel treatment of ventricular tachycardia 
storm in patients with cardiomyopathy. Heart Rhythm. 
2014;11(4):541 -546. 
39. Riccio E, Sabbatini M, Esposito G, Pisani A. Catheter -based renal 
denervation in ADPKD: Just for pain control? Am J Kidney Dis. 
2014;64(6):999. 
40. Rosenberg M. Overview of the management of chronic kidney 
disease in adults. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: 
UpToDate; reviewed July 2016.      
       
  
        
  
          
  
            
  
 
  
            
  
   
          
        
        
 
  
 
 
 
   
    
       
  
  
  
         
 Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 32 of 34 
41. Shantha GP,  Pancholy  SB. Eﬀect  of renal sympathetic  
denervation on apnea -hypopnea index in patients with 
obst ructive sleep apnea: A systematic review and meta -analysis. 
Sleep Breath. 2015;19(1):29 -34. 
42. Simonyi G, Bedros JR, Medvegy M. Device therapy of resistant 
hypertension. Orv Hetil. 2013;154(6):203 -208. 
43. Stavropoulos K, Patoulias D, Imprialos K, et al. Eﬃcacy  and safety 
of renal denervation for the management of arterial 
hypertension: A systematic review and meta -analysis of 
randomized, sham -controlled, catheter -based trials. J Clin 
Hypertens (Greenwich). 2020;22(4):572 -584. 
44. Tam GM, Yan BP, Shetty SV, Lam YY. Transcatheter renal artery 
sympathetic denervation for resistant hypertension: An old 
paradigm revisited. Int J Cardiol. 2013;164(3):277 -281. 
45. Thorp AA, Schlaich MP. Device -based approaches for renal nerve 
ablation for hypertension and beyond. Front Physiol. 2015;6:193. 
46. Tsiouﬁs  K. Ventricular arrhythmia episodes may decrease after 
renal denervation in resistant hypertensive patients. Cardiac 
Rhythm News, March 21, 2013. Available at: 
http://www.cxvascular.com/crn -latest -news/cardiac -rhythm ­
news ---latest -news/ventricular- arrhythmia -episodes -may ­
decrease -after -renal -denervation -in-resistant -hypertensive ­
patien ts. Acessed September 18, 2014 
47. Ukena C, Bauer A, Mahfoud F, et al. Renal sympathetic 
denervation fortreatment of electrical storm: First -in-man 
experience. Clin Res Cardiol. 2012;101(1):63 -67. 
48. Voskuil M, Verloop WL, Blankestijn PJ, et al. Percutaneous ren al 
denervation for the treatment of resistant essential 
hypertension; the ﬁrst Dutch experience. Neth Heart J. 2011;19(7 ­
8):319 -323.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
                 
       
              
                  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 33 of 34 
Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan be nefits and 
constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or 
program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any 
results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna 
or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be 
updated and therefore is subject to change. 
Copyright © 2001 -2021 Aetna Inc.      
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Radiofrequency Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve -Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna Page 34 of 34 
AETNA BETTER HEALTH® OF PENNSYLVANIA 
Amendment to 
 
Aetna Clinical Policy Bulletin Number: 0847 Radiofrequency 
 
Ablation of the Renal Sympathetic Nerve 
 
There are no amendments for Medicaid. 
updated 12/17/2020 