Page 1 of 3  
Cigna National  Formulary Coverage Policy : DQM Per Days Antiemetics – Doxylamine and Pyridoxine Combination Products  Cigna National Formulary Coverage Policy   
   
 
 
Drug Quantity Management – Per Days  
Antiemetics – Doxylamine and Pyridoxine Combination Products  
 
Table of Contents  
 
National Formulary Medical Necessity  ................  1 
Conditions Not Covered  ................................ ....... 2 
Background  ................................ ..........................  2 
References  ................................ ..........................  3 
Revision History  ................................ ...................  3 Product Identif ier(s)  
 
Effective 1/1/23 to 2/6/23: 108030  
 
Effective 2/7/23: 60889  
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE   
The following Coverage Policy applies to health benefit plans administered by Cigna Companies. Certain Cigna Companies and/or lines of business only provide utilization review services to clients and do not make coverage determinations. References to standard benefit plan 
language and coverage determinations do not apply to those clients. Coverage P olicies are intended to provide guidance in interpreting 
certain standard benefit plans administered by Cigna Companies. Please note, the terms of a customer’s particular benefit plan document [Group Service Agreement, Evidence of Coverage, Certificate of Coverage, Summary Plan Description (SPD) or similar plan document] may 
differ significantly from the standard benefit plans upon which these Coverage Policies are based. For example, a customer’s benefit plan 
document may contain a specific exclusion related to a topic addressed in a Coverage Policy. In the event of a conflict, a customer’s benefit 
plan document always supersedes the information in the Coverage Policies. In the absence of a controlling federal or state coverage mandate, benefits are ultimately determined by the terms of the applicable benefit plan document. Coverage determinations in each specific 
instance require consideration of 1) the terms of the applicable benefit plan document in effect on the date of service; 2) any applicable 
laws/regulations; 3) any relevant collateral source materials including Coverage Policies and; 4) the specific facts of the particul ar 
situation. Coverage Policies relate exclusively to the administration of health benefit plans. Coverage Policies are not recommendations for 
treatment and should never be used as treatment guidelines. In certain markets, delegated vendor guidelines may be used to support 
medical necessity and other coverage determinations.  
National Formulary Medical Necessity  
 
Drugs Affected  
• Bonjesta® (doxylamine succinate and pyridoxine hydrochloride tablets)  
• Diclegis® (doxylamine succinate and pyridoxine hydrochloride delayed- release tablets – generic)  
 
This Drug Quantity Management program has been developed to prevent stockpiling, misuse and/or overuse while providing a sufficient quantity for the indications of doxy lamine and pyridoxine products .  If the Drug 
Quantity Management rule is not met for the requested medication at the point of service, coverage will be 
determined by the Criteria below.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 2 of 3  
Cigna National  Formulary Coverage Policy : DQM Per Days Antiemetics – Doxylamine and Pyridoxine Combination Products  Drug Quantity Limits  
Product  Strength and Form  Maximum Quan tity per 365 
Days‡ 
Bonjesta®  
(doxylamine succinate and pyridoxine hydrochloride 
tablets)  20/20 mg tablets  360 tablets† 
Diclegis® 
(doxylamine succinate and pyridoxine hydrochloride 
delayed-release tablets, generic)  
 10/10 mg tablets  720 tablets* 
‡ This is enough drug for individual s to complete 6 months of therapy.  For coverage of additional quantities (for example, 9 
months of therapy), a coverage review is required.  † A quantity of 360 Bonjesta tablets per 365 days (six fills of 60 tablets/30 
days) will be covered without prior authorization.  * A quantity of 720 Diclegis tablets per 365 days (six fills of 120 tablets/30 
days) will be covered without prior authorization.  
 
Criteria  
 
Cigna covers quantities as medically necessary when the followi ng criteria are met:  
 Bonjesta  
1. If the individual  has continued nausea and vomiting of pregnancy beyond 6 months, approve 60 tablets per 
30 days for three fills to allow for a total treatment duration of 9 months.  
 Diclegis (generic)  
1. If the individual  has continued nausea and vomiting of pregnancy beyond 6 months, approve 120 tablets per 
30 days for three fills to allow for a total treatment duration of 9 months.  
  
Conditions Not Covered  
 
Any other exception is considered not medically necessary . 
 
Background  
 Overview  
Bonjesta and Diclegis are fixed dose combination drug products of doxylamine succinate, an antihistamine, and 
pyridoxine hydrochloride, a Vitamin B6 analog.
1,2  Diclegis and Bonjesta are indicated for the treatment of 
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy  in women who do not respond to conser vative management.  
 
Dosing  
On Day 1, the dose of Bonjesta is one tablet at bedtime.1  If this dose adequately controls symptoms on Day 2, 
the patient continues to take one tablet at bedtime.  However, if symptoms persist on Day 2, the dose is increased to two tablets daily (one tablet in the morning and one tablet at bedtime).  The maximum 
recommended dose is two tablets per day.  
 
On Day 1, the dose of Diclegis is two tablets at bedtime.
2  If this dose adequately controls symptoms on Day 2, 
the patient continues to take two tablets at bedtime.  However, if symptoms persist into the afternoon of Day 2, 
the dose is increased to three tablets daily on Day 3 (one tablet in the morning and two tablets at bedtime).  If three tablets adequately control symptoms on Day 4, the dose is continued.  If symptoms persist, the dose on 
Day 4 is four tablets daily (one tablet in the morning, one tablet mid- afternoon, and two tablets at bedtime).  The 
maximum recommended dose is four tablets per day.   
 
For both Bonjesta and Diclegis, the tablets must be swallowed whole.
1,2  Tablets should not be crushed, chewed 
or split.  
 
  Page 3 of 3  
Cigna National  Formulary Coverage Policy : DQM Per Days Antiemetics – Doxylamine and Pyridoxine Combination Products  Availability  
Bonjesta is available as tablets containing 20 mg of doxylamine succinate and 20 mg of pyridoxine hydrochloride 
in bottles of 60 tablets.1  Diclegis (generic) is available as delayed- release tablets containing 10 mg of 
doxylamine succinate and 10 mg of pyridoxine hydrochloride in bottles of 100 tablets.2 
 
References 
 
1. Bonjesta® tablets [prescribing information] Bryn Mawr, PA: Duchesnay USA; February 2022.  
2. Diclegis® tablets [prescribing information] Bryn Mawr, PA: Duchesnay USA; June 2018.  
 
Revision History  
 
 
Type of 
Revision  Summary of Changes  Approval Date  
Annual 
Revision  No change to criteria.  04/19/2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Cigna Companies” refers to operating subsidiaries of Cigna Corporation. All products and services are provided exclusively by or through 
such operating subsidiaries, including Cigna Health and Life Insurance Company, Connecticut General Life Insurance Company, Evernorth 
Behavioral Health, Inc., Cigna Health Management, Inc. and HMO or service company subsidiaries of Cigna Health Corporation. T he Cigna 
name, logo, and other Cigna marks are owned by Cigna Intellectual Property, Inc. © 2023 Cigna.  